


      I enjoy visiting the Hong Kong Museum of History, joining the "The Hong Kong Story" guided tour. After spending an hour's time with a museum docent, we have skimmed the entirety of Hong Kong's growth and development. The museum is a time machine, teleporting the past into the present day, for local and foreign visitors alike. From the Stone Age to China's dynasties, to the Opium War and Britain's colonial rule, up to Japan's occupation during World War II, and the handover of Hong Kong's sovereignty to our motherland, etc. Every scene of our ancestors' experiences and pain becomes real for us.
      
        History continues to roll and develop. Historians conduct research and arrange facts and stories. But history is like a living entity. It repeats, again and again. Understanding the repetition, the crucial incidents and the context helps teach our future generations.
        
          Despite the importance of history, it seems to lack popularity amongst students at all levels of education in Hong Kong. Why? A simple reason is money. History taught in universities fails to draw much student interest because other disciplines, such as law or medicine, promise much more lucrative future careers. Young people may demonstrate only a limited interest in the subject of history because they may think history is too distant from them. Accordingly, young people are unlikely to expose themselves to history voluntarily. As a result, they may only know and barely understand their own history, while the little knowledge they possess is gleaned from inaccurate sources.
          
            Local youths who waive the British colonial flag demonstrate a case in point. Recently, I was sad to read in newspapers how a small contingent had hoisted what they call "the Coat of Arms of Hong Kong". The same group had celebrated the anniversary of the Treaty of Nanking, a notorious and unfair compact. In some other isolated occasions, young people, hanging around with the same flag (which symbolizes the subjugation of former colony days), were shouting for the establishment of an "independent" state in Hong Kong with absolute autonomy from the Chinese nation.
            
              Oh my goodness! Do they actually understand what they are waiving, what they are shouting? Have they ever studied history? Do they lack even basic knowledge of how our ancestors suffered under European countries' invasion after the Opium War? Shame on them! They should learn some history.
              
                During the Opium War in the late Qing Dynasty (1644-1911), the British invaders, armed with rifles and cannons, raped our motherland and left her in ruins. As a result, Hong Kong Island was ceded under the Nanking Treaty. Hereafter the dark days followed. Hong Kong fell into the hands of the British invaders. They robbed the rights of local Chinese, who suffered discrimination and prejudice, until the handover of sovereignty to our motherland in 1997.
                
                  Indeed, there was hardly any equality in colonial Hong Kong. British enjoyed priority and supreme social status in our land. Our voices were never respected, despite the political ideals that the British overlords claimed - "democracy". What democracy? The majority of young generations today, especially those born in the late 80s and the 90s, had barely (or not at all) witnessed or breathed the injustice of the British governance. Thus, they may have an incorrect impression that the British were responsible for developing the former colony into a world-class city. The colonial apologists are wrong. In fact, Hong Kong's success was built and rooted by our ancestors. Our great grandparents, grandparents and parents poured blood, sweat and tears into the foundations of our city. Accumulation of wealth was, and still is, the result of their efforts and hard work.
                  
                    Radical members of today's youth possess thoughts and opinions that are tilted and misled. They are reluctant to learn the facts. They continue to reject the contributions made by leadership of the HKSAR government. They nurture false concepts that only the British rule contributed to Hong Kong's development. They ignore the hard work and hardship endured by our parents and grandparents. I have read from some discussion forums in which some bloggers even disregard and do not appreciate the supply of fresh water from the mainland. I trust most of the young generations do not hold such extreme views.
                    
                      Youths ignorant of history should put away their resistance to our motherland. The Internet won't explain the actual development of China. Go ahead and actually explore our motherland. Base your thoughts on your own experiences there. Our nation has gained great achievements in various aspects including the economy, culture and society. See for yourself, and be sure to keep an eye to the future. You will discover opportunities in our motherland.
                      
                        Young generations in Hong Kong must learn history and learn from history - read texts, visit museums and do research. They should respect history and not make unrealistic demands. We shall not take things for granted. Meanwhile, college students and graduates are also strongly encouraged to explore our nation, perhaps via exchange experiences, internship programs, excursion tours or voluntary services. To enrich themselves with firsthand knowledge and experiences of culture of our motherland, they can then aim high, forging a bright path for their future careers.
                        
                          The author is Chief Convener of the Youth Exchange with Government Officials.
                          
(HK Edition 02/23/2013 page1)

