 
It was terrible that Hongkongers died in the Manila hostage crisis in 2010, but the irony was overwhelming when People Power lawmakers said they would seek a law revision to ban Filipino domestic helpers from working in the city until the Philippines apologizes. 
"People power" is a political term denoting the populist driving force of any social movement which invokes the authority of grassroots opinion and willpower, usually in opposition to that of conventionally organized corporate or political forces. The term was first used by members of the 1960s "flower power" movement which initially protested against the Vietnam War. 
Hong Kong's People Power is a political coalition established in early 2011, after Raymond Wong Yuk-man and Albert Chan Wai-yip quit the League of Social Democrats citing disagreement with leader Andrew To Kwan-hang and his faction. 
The possessive form "People's Power" is also a common political rallying cry used in party names and slogans. Instances of its use are the Khmer People Power (Poder Popular) Movement in Cambodia and the People's Power Party (Phak Palang Prachachon) in Thailand. Interestingly enough, its use as the name of a political entity is more prevalent in developing countries. Another example, more relevant to the ironies in question, is the People's Power party in the Philippines, Lakas ng Bayan, which was formed by Senator Benigno "Ninoy" Aquino, Jr, father of Philippine President Benigno Aquino III, for the Philippine regional elections in 1978. 
I am old enough to remember Ferdinand Emmanuel Edralin Marcos, Sr, and so should everyone in his or her mid-forties and above. Marcos declared martial law in 1972, extending his rule beyond the constitutional two-term limit. As a result, his tenure lasted from 1965 to 1986. Later it was discovered that during his 20-year rule, he and his wife Imelda Marcos had moved billions of dollars of embezzled public funds outside the country. 
In 1983, then opposition leader Benigno Aquino, Jr was assassinated upon his return to the Philippines after three years of self-imposed exile in the United States. The assassination sparked the People Power Revolution, a series of popular demonstrations in the Philippines that culminated in the overthrow of Marcos in 1986. 
After the People Power Revolution, Corazon Aquino (Aquino III's mother) was installed as president. 



In every sense of the word, President Benigno Aquino III is the son of both the People's Power party and the People Power Revolution. Perhaps he does represent the will of the people in the Philippines; but the People Power in Hong Kong does not share solidarity with him. This is the first irony. 
The "people power" irony is not a mere play on words. Democratic institutions were introduced to the Philippines by the United States at the beginning of the 20th century. The apparent success of these imported practices gave the Philippines its reputation as "the showcase of democracy in Asia". There is no shortage of social movements and sustained campaigns of civil resistance against the government, but nothing has improved substantially in terms of the economy and the general welfare of the people. In the context of the "Occupy Central" movement in Hong Kong, comes the second irony. 
Philippine People Power Revolution II in January 2001 peacefully overthrew President Joseph Estrada and swore his Vice-President, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo into office as president. Philippine People Power Revolution III in April aimed to remove Macapagal-Arroyo from the presidency and reinstate Estrada, but failed. People versus people, Egypt-style, that's the third irony. 
Since 1970, there were close to a dozen attempted regime changes in the Philippines. In 2007, Senator Antonio Trillanes IV, Brigadier General Danilo Lim, and 25 other mutineers seized the Rizal function room of the Manila Peninsula Hotel. There was an exchange of fire before the mutineers surrendered; hotel walls and windows sustained weapons damage. Hong Kong's authority should have blacklisted the Philippines back in 2007 when guns were fired in Manila, a similar action which the Ministry of Foreign Affairs took in early 2008. We in Hong Kong did not heed that warning. Travel alerts are useful only when they prevent terrible things from happening. That's the fourth irony. 
The author is a member of the Commission on Strategic Development. 

(HK Edition 10/22/2013 page1)

