 
Whether universal suffrage can be implemented in the 2017 Chief Executive (CE) Election is a huge deal in Hong Kong's political life, but there are still some mistaken ideas about this issue and the term "real (or fake) universal suffrage" has to be the biggest of them all. Here's why - because it is based purely on double standards. The individuals and organizations that coined this term insist that universal suffrage, which is enshrined in the Basic Law, cannot be genuine without "citizen nomination". I seriously doubt they actually believe it themselves! 
Let's give their logic a try. It makes sense to some extent if one says a ship that cannot sail is a fake one, not a real one. The same cannot be said of the claim that a ship that does not have a dining table is a fake one because ships normally have tables onboard. Whoever subscribes to that assumption is either cognitively challenged or simply out of their mind. 
There are about 200 countries in the world and many of them have implemented nationwide or regional universal suffrage, but that does not mean all of them accept "citizen nomination". If the assertion that universal suffrage without "citizen nomination" is fake stands, then a whole lot of countries should be seen as exercising "fake" universal suffrage. And those who describe universal suffrage without "citizen nomination" as fake should be sued for slander by so many countries and regions, including none other than the United States. 
In US presidential elections, the candidates have always been nominated by the two dominant parties - the Republican Party and the Democratic Party - while smaller ones never managed to do so. This alternate national power switch between two parties has lasted almost forever. In the past 100 years, only the 1992 presidential election saw a third candidate, Ross Perot, who was nominated by ordinary voters scattered around the country. Does this fact mean all the US presidential elections so far have been carried out by fake universal suffrage except the 1992 edition? I'm dying to hear what the Americans have to say about this sweeping conclusion of Hong Kong opposition on universal suffrage. 
As for Great Britain, the prime minister of the country is not elected by universal suffrage but the process does involve nomination. The "problem" is that it is not "citizen nomination". It has always been the Labour Party nominating its candidate and the Tory Party naming its own. Should we call it fake nomination, according to the Hong Kong opposition's logic? One would assume the opposition camp here idolizes the US and Britain when it come to "true democracy". How they managed to pull such a clever punch at the US and UK election systems is beyond me. That is why I believe the assertion that universal suffrage without "citizen nomination" is fake universal suffrage is a false proposition. 
Some opposition figures here have said the CE election by universal suffrage would be a fake one if no opposition candidate is in the running. That is just as absurd as the "citizen nomination" theory. Don't they know the simple truth that there is no such a thing as a free lunch? How can anyone be so shameless as to demand guaranteed CE election candidacy without hard work? Or maybe they don't mind being considered a joke? 
Some people argue that opposition parties won nearly 60 percent of popular votes in geographical constituencies in the last LegCo election and that should justify a candidacy for them in the 2017 CE Election by universal suffrage. This assertion may seem solid by the sound of it, but is really not at all. Keep in mind that the opposition camp in Hong Kong is not a single entity but a bunch of groups with different objectives tentatively held together by some sort of a common ideology. The "sure votes" any of them commands are not nearly enough to win the CE election, not to mention the fact that it remains unclear if the two elections are comparable. And only heaven knows if an opposition candidate can muster all the support those opposition parties have to offer. 
Actually, the nomination mechanism prescribed in the Basic Law is more advanced than some of the typical systems in Western countries. For starters, the nominating committee is broadly representative by including people of different political beliefs from all corners of society, compared with party-centric nomination that represents only one political aspiration and certain interest groups (such as in the US). It is also more democratic in that the nominating committee is required to follow democratic procedures, whereas in some Western countries, anyone can be nominated by 500 elite individual citizens (such as in France). Then there is the advantage of diversity. The nominating committee in Hong Kong can nominate several candidates, while the party-centric nomination system of the US very rarely produces more than two candidates, one representing the Republican and the other the Democratic Party. 
The author is a law professor. This is an excerpted translation of his article published in Wen Wei Po on Nov 28.




(HK Edition 11/29/2013 page9)

