 







 
James Shing Pan-yu believes ATV's mission is in Hong Kong's best interests, and the station's close ties with the mainland media are a definite plus for the city's media industry as a whole. Edmond Tang / China Daily







 
ATV's staff have struggled to find an identity for themselves and to 'revolutionize' the local media.







 
Hong Kong's younger generation needs a positive and broader mentality towards national education and learn more about the motherland, says James Shing.



After decades of being perceived as playing second fiddle to rivals in Hong Kong, Asia Television (ATV) may be headed for a turnaround in its fortunes. James Shing Pan-yu, the self-made media guru at the helm of ATV, outlines a broad vision for the future, a new branding for ATV and its aspirations to become part of the "Chinese Dream", SL Luo writes. 
The notion that Asia Television (ATV), Hong Kong's television broadcaster for more than half-a-century, suddenly could transform itself into an "Asian CNN," or a "Chinese Bloomberg", would likely fall on the ears of many of the broadcaster's detractors, as an expression of a not very lucid pipe dream. 
But James Shing Pan-yu, the new man at the helm of ATV, dismisses the skeptics and their doubts. The executive-turned-media mentor took over as executive director of ATV in 2011, nearly 57 years after the former Rediffusion Television came into being. Since the company's inaugural broadcast, the station has gone through seven management overhauls. 
Shing envisages the future of ATV as a window on China, a news channel with a global reach, like an "Asian CNN." That, he says, is his biggest goal. "We're not trying to emulate CNN in every respect, but want to be a truly Asian entity that presents the news from a Hong Kong and Asian perspective in viewing Asia and the mainland." 
The Canadian-trained business management executive is also a student of History and a firm believer in the West to East progression of power and influence. The trend, he says, is irresistible and he wants ATV to be a part of that "Chinese Dream." 
"In the next 10, 20 or 30 years, Asia and the mainland will be the global focus for economic development. Western entrepreneurs already pay attention to what's happening in China and Asia. So we need to provide them with news about finance, politics, culture, even entertainment in a way that not only engages people in the West but encourages them to learn more about China," Shing told China Daily. 
"We must use our own vision to show the rest of the world how we view ourselves, to help them to understand us from a Chinese and Asian perspective, different from their prejudices and biases of the past." 
Shanghai-born Shing admits he lacks great media savvy or even industry background, but says he has always been inspired by ATV's creative flair that left a lasting impression dating back to his childhood. 
Another of Shing's personal goals is to "revolutionize" local media. He thinks some of them are pretty "immature", carping and "negative", eager to take a jaundiced view of everything. 
"When I joined ATV, I found Hong Kong people immersed in a pool of pessimism and apprehension. The malaise was being fostered and then aggravated by irresponsible media that thrives on negative news, attack journalism, be it about Hong Kong or the mainland," he complained. 
Shing hopes to change that and contribute to a healthy environment sustained by balanced reporting, presentation and analysis, in the best traditions of journalism. 
"Being professional is one thing, being "creative" at the expensive of balance and ethics is another. At ATV, we decided to establish our own identity and make ethical and conscionable journalism a leading part of that identity." 
"Hong Kong Conscience" has become the station's slogan and the centerpiece of its identity. The new branding came after much brainstorming among ATV's senior partners, including Wong Ching, a major investor and a relative of Shing's. 
Shing points to "Hong Kong Loving Hearts" - a program Shing calls ATV's trump card. The program became an instant hit when it was launched in 2010. "Hong Kong Loving Hearts" brings to the fore evocative tales of Hong Kong people making great sacrifices for the well-being of others. Shing cites the story of a brilliant young doctor, who all but gave up his own promising career to help blind people across the border on the mainland. 
"We need to do something the media seriously lacks in Hong Kong. Some people don't understand the real meaning of conscience. They think it's just unearthing evil deeds and revealing the truth. It's not so. The critical part is that we must be seen to be able to report and balance a story in true light and balance the whole picture," says Shing. 
Shing claims the new branding for ATV as Hong Kong's conscience is working because the city needs that spirit. "We have too much of mind-wrecking stories" sunk into people's minds, he says. 
Cross-border partnerships 
ATV's ties with the mainland, particularly with media organizations, took off in 2007 after businessman Chan Wing-kee, a Standing Committee member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, teamed up with Phoenix Satellite Television Holdings chairman, Liu Changle, to buy a majority stake in ATV. 
ATV now beams its programs on both its Home and World channels to all of Guangdong Province. It cooperates closely with Guangdong TV. 
"This is another big plus for us," says Shing. "It allows Hong Kong and Macao people to know more about the mainland and vice versa. Hong Kong's economy is intimately tied to the mainland's. They're inseparable. Financially, there's plenty of room for improvement. One of our other dreams is to come up with a 'Chinese Bloomberg' or an Asian equivalent of the business news channel and make ATV a new Asian entity." 
A University of Hong Kong survey, taken in February, 2011, showed ATV's viewership in Hong Kong shot up to capture 63 percent of the market. A few months later, it grabbed another three percent of the audience. 
Shing was not at all surprised that the station's links with the mainland drew an outcry from the opposition - including accusation of biased coverage and meddling by management in editorial decision making. 
Shing calls the opposition claims "absurd". 
"We have not changed our texture at all. We are doing what the media ought to do - in the right way. We're proud of the links which have brought economic benefits to all sides. We respect freedom of speech in Hong Kong and we accept frank and constructive criticisms. But we won't stand silent before charges that are patently untrue," he says. 
Path to democracy 
Shing accuses the pan-democratic camp of clinging to a Western conception of democratic governance and trying to impose it on Hong Kong through coercion and intimidation. The majority of people in Hong Kong do not share the view of the opposition, Shing argues. 
"As promised, we shall have universal suffrage in Hong Kong by 2017. How to go about achieving it and making it work are encompassed in the principle of 'One Country, Two Systems.' This principle has been working successfully since the handover. 
"Resorting to radical action would not be in the interests of Hong Kong or its people. It would be a setback to the implementation of democratic principles. I believe most Hong Kong people love Hong Kong and the country, and the threats by the opposition do not have public support." 
The fuss in certain quarters over the issue of national education is uncalled for, Shing chips in. Surely people in Hong Kong have a right to know more about China, its policies, its culture and development. Hong Kong is part of China after all. 



"There is no brainwashing. This is Hong Kong, part of China. We are all Chinese. Why oppose learning about the country? 
"We are playing our part by including more news about the mainland on all fronts, through our close relationship with the mainland media. This is part of national education," Shing stressed. 
Shing sees no serious issues in the petty social squabbles that sometimes surface in the kind of "us and them" divide between Hong Kong and mainlanders. People have differing views at times. This is nothing special and every media stream has a responsibility to convey those different viewpoints, he adds. 
"Our country is too big," he explains. "Shanghai and Beijing people, for instance, look at each other in a different light. Although they share the same culture, they do seem to dislike each other. 
"The same applies to Hong Kong and the mainland. ATV endeavors to include more news about the mainland, particularly in regard to economic and cultural development. And we convey more Hong Kong news to Guangdong to help people there understand that we are all one big family. The media has an obligation to do this." 

(China Daily 04/05/2013 page8)

