 
The story started when Edward Snowden decided to blow the whistle at a sensitive time. The disclosure embarrassed the US government and put Washington in a diplomatic checkmate. No doubt the scandal shocked the world and we now know the US has crossed the line. Our computers were hacked and our freedom has been infringed. They come across our university network and rob our privacy. Our personal data fell into the hands of unknown agents. One simple question for the US government - on what basis can they violate our rights? Is it simply that they crowned themselves as Interpol? What a joke! 
The US says it ranks freedom, democracy and human rights at the top of the value chain. But apparently, this is only expressed on paper and in theory, but not in reality. Unauthorized wiretapping followed by hacking of networks on US soil, and now on China's soil, the illegal infringement expands to territories on a global scale. 
Appropriation of our privacy, our personal data and our sensitive information without our consent, shows no respect for citizens. This is a violation of our human rights, and the US government and President Barack Obama should be scrutinized. We have to protest vigorously and express our concern. Is this so-called US liberty? Are we all being categorized as their so-called Guantanamo terrorists? Spying, collecting unauthorized surveillance and monitoring our daily communications with no sound reason, the US government owns us an explanation and apology. And they must not let these violations be repeated. 



We vote for candidates who are eventually elected as members of the Legislative Council and speak for us when such opportunities arise. Now comes the opportunity and we urge both camps to voice our interests. The world is watching. Despite our repeated protests and the storming influence of the press, the "pro-democrats" appear to have remained silent on the US scandal. Where is the "pro-democrat" camp when the community needs their attendance? Their legislators should make themselves clear - they are accountable to the community in Hong Kong! They are remunerated for their role. The "pro-democrat" camp should join hands with our pro-establishment camp to urge the US to stop continuing to infringe on our privacy. The local voters are their real boss and now their boss wants justice. The "pro-democrats" are accountable to their voters, please stop hiding. Step out and make the complaints to Washington please. "Pro-democrats", this is your job, unless you are not in a position to do so due to unknown reasons to us. 
We saw campaigns for the call for universal suffrage from the "pro-democrat" camp. The "Occupy Central" campaign is wrapped with universal values like human rights, equality and justice, but in fact it does not serve such purposes. What a fancy package! But we all know that "Occupy" only serves the purpose of destructing our economy and legal framework. Recent surveys indicate Hong Kong has become less competitive. It is little wonder and not without reason as Hong Kong's progress has been decelerating with politically orientated judicial reviews and legislators not acting in our best interests. 
Now, Snowden risks himself, forgoes his liberty, his career and even his safety to make the allegation. He speaks for truth and symbolizes real freedom of expression. He is the man who stands for justice. 
It sounds to me like the rationale behind "Occupy" and the US values of protection and respect of human rights are twins, i.e. liars telling lies and covering up with fairy tales. We definitely would love to boycott these imported viruses since these fake values only devalue our economy and stability. In fact, the US style of values does not fit our community. President Obama, I urge your government to stop infiltrating our computers, our values and our domestic affairs. 
The author is chief convener of the Youth Exchange with Government Officials. 

(HK Edition 06/26/2013 page9)

