 



In his recently published "Governance and Regime Building in HKSAR in the First 15 Years after the Handover" (in Chinese), Professor Lau Siu-kai lamented our government's lack of strategic thinking. This, in fact, is common knowledge, but the verdict is a lot more authoritative coming from Lau. After all, Lau was head of our government's Central Policy Unit, the official think tank unmatched by any others in Hong Kong. 
Lau pointed to factors that prevent policy research from receiving the attention that it deserves. Apparently, the previous administration was skeptical about long-term planning. It believed in "a small government", and perceived any attempt to guide our society as socialism. At the same time, those senior officials' unfamiliarity with planning added to the reluctance, and God forbid if some PhDs with degrees in social sciences could dictate policies against "sound decisions" derived from red tape. 
Given this background, we can begin to understand Chief Secretary Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor's seemingly absurd response to Ip Kwok-him's question on "Hong Kong's fertility rate" in the Legislative Council last week. She reported that the Steering Committee on Population Policy "has identified a number of priority areas, one of which is 'to strengthen family, encourage marriage and childbirth' in order to make good use of Hong Kong's existing population and labor force." However, Lam was reluctant to make better use of that because "policies to strengthen families and encourage childbirth often involve a range of measures that cut across various policy areas." 



One would have thought that senior officials get their fat pay check exactly because they solve problems that "involve a range of measures that cut across various policy areas". 
In this connection, a little bit of socialism might do us good. Nanfang Daily, the newspaper based in Guangzhou has recently started a debate on Guangzhou's future. Guangzhou has enjoyed exceptional economic growth in the past 30 years, but its top-3 status is threatened by Tianjin, whose GDP is expected to exceed Guangzhou in two years. At the same time, the Cheng-Yu (Chengdu-Chongqing) economic zone set up in 2011 is also seen by Guangzhou as a major competitor. 
As other cities invest in infrastructure to upgrade their competitiveness, major enterprises in Guangzhou begin to relocate their headquarter functions. NetEase, an Internet company, moved its research facilities to Hangzhou, and Guangzhou Baojie Daily Chemical to Beijing. Officials, scholars and citizens in Guangzhou are all concerned about this trend, and they are thinking about how to retain and attract enterprises. In order to achieve this, the city will have to get even more business-friendly, and become more livable (with clean air and affordable housing) so that talents are willing to stay. 
Guangzhou also faces a challenge in establishing itself as the center within the Pearl River Delta Region. Whereas Shanghai's leading status in the Yangtze River Delta Economic Zone is beyond dispute, Guangzhou has Shenzhen and Hong Kong to reckon with. We in Hong Kong may not care who the "big brother" is, but a pecking order is crucial under the paradigm of regional cooperation. 
The discussion in Guangzhou also dwelled on areas such as foreign direct investment, research and development, city planning, urban-rural integration and political reform. The debate was lively and engaging, with a lot of citizens participating with blog posts and comments. 
We in Hong Kong take pride in the freedom we enjoy as well as the sophistication of our governance. But while we have freedom of the press, the media do not cover topics of long-term importance. We will soon be having universal suffrage, but our politicians and government officials do not have the habit of truly engaging us. 
A genuine democracy is not about one person, one vote. It is about a process whereby collective consciousness emerges. Voting is only the final stage of the process, before that we must collectively identify the issues, and converge on possible solutions. 
The author is a member of the Commission on Strategic Development. 

(HK Edition 06/11/2013 page9)

