 



For weeks now I have been turning over in my mind deeply worrying thoughts regarding what could be some quite disturbing "funny business" about Hong Kong's affairs. To wit, why is it that within just a few months, senior diplomats from both Britain and the United States have suddenly expressed great "interest" in the direction Hong Kong will take in future, and nagged us yet again about the virtues and values of universal suffrage and the rest of that old refrain? 
Diplomats don't lightly go shooting their mouths off unless there's a darn good reason, and in these particular instances, all three senior officials seemed to deliberately wipe their boots on what are accepted as the customary norms of diplomatic niceties. 
So was it mere coincidence or part of a concerted campaign by London and Washington to meddle mischievously in our affairs for no other purpose than to keep our present troubles on the boil. 
It all started in May when outgoing US Consul-General Stephen Young proclaimed his belief about how much better life in Hong Kong would be if only we would adopt a new political system incorporating those qualities the US enjoys. Then, on July 31, his successor as foremost American official in Hong Kong, Clifford Hart, took a quantum leap beyond customary diplomatic protocol by repeating the mixture - a most undiplomatic way indeed to introduce himself to his new host city. 
Hardly had the pair been given richly deserved rebukes by Foreign Ministry officials than a pious homily on the same subject was delivered by Britain's Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Hugo Swire, who had the impertinence to suggest that Hong Kong should mark the United Nations "International Day of Democracy" on Sept 15 by taking steps to introduce universal suffrage blah blah blah. 
Swire, too, received a jolting rebuke from Beijing. But, thinking it all through, it seems more than a bit fishy that in a couple of months, three highly-placed diplomats have become mischief-making meddlers who totally abrogated the basic tenets of their profession, which perhaps could best be summed up as "always appear to mind your own business while keeping an open mind and a closed mouth". 



Let us pause to consider the present state of Hong Kong. Today it seems to be a given that for a variety of reasons we have simply lost our mojo - our willpower, determination, get-up-and-go spirit, even the driving force that is the very "engine" of Hong Kong. 
Maybe we'd had it so good for so long that we were becoming complacent, and that complacency then turned to lassitude. Thus we became dispirited, and then somehow just lost the plot. But stop - even if our spirits were at their lowest ebb, that's not the way Hong Kong would be likely to act, for the simple reason that we are not quitters. So is there another explanation? 
All of which brings me back to my feeling that other "influences" might have been slyly at work, virtually sabotaging the Hong Kong success story because presumably their principals would like the Hong Kong SAR of the People's Republic of China to fail, and fail ingloriously. 
For instance why is it that so much dissent and division has arisen lately across our society? To what extent does it spring from the naysayers in the Legislative Council, the self-styled libertarians who believe their political agendas are more important than the continuing viability of Hong Kong, its economy, the very heartbeat of our prosperity, and the lifestyle of verve and audacity that the economy until recently enabled us all to enjoy? 
We don't have to look far to find other forces at play that are exacerbating Hong Kong's current worries, in particular, the callow and ill-mannered youths among the ranks of the supposed cream of our graduating students. 
The most shameful of these incidents of gross misbehavior by students happened on June 28 when graduates of the Academy of Performing Arts disgraced themselves by publicly insulting our Chief Executive instead of showing their appreciation for the government-funded student loans that had supported them through their years of studies. 
If we wished to "fight fire with fire", some members of the old school of disciplinarians might propose the discontinuation of student loans to those who made such a public show of disrespect for officialdom. They might also suggest a painstaking perusal of the fine print of the employment contract of a certain member of the professorial ranks of one of our government-funded universities. 
Or should we look deeper into the causes of all this dissent, and investigate whether or not, for instance, there has been involvement and interference from afar? Maybe it's an over-reaction but I can't shake off this nasty feeling that "fishy business" is afoot in all our ongoing woes. 
The author is Op-Ed editor of China Daily Hong Kong Edition. albertlin@chinadailyhk.com 

(HK Edition 10/01/2013 page6)

