


      President Xi Jinping emphasized at a function held by the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) in Beijing late last year that the country will continue to boost sustained and healthy economic development and social harmony in 2013. At the same time it will maintain the long-term prosperity and stability of Hong Kong and Macao.
      
        While in Hong Kong, several marches and gatherings took place on New Year's Day to protest or support Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying. Though such activities are quite common here, it is still uncomfortable watching some people venting their anger with no regard to social order and peaceful, rational expression. Seeing such behavior, one cannot but ask: Does this kind of expression really represent Hong Kong residents? And do Hongkongers approve of this kind of protest?
        
          This author still remembers a year-end episode of the popular TV magazine Lonely Planet listed Hong Kong as one of the top 10 cities for tourists in 2012, and the reason behind the pick was none other than frequent public protest marches, because they seldom fail to entertain with melodrama and song and dance. Perhaps they do enhance Hong Kong's image as a dynamic metropolis, but one cannot help sensing the sarcasm in the billing despite the fact that emotion-charged protests and noisy marches demonstrate Hong Kong's cultural diversity and inclusiveness. All Hong Kong residents take pride in quite a few mass processions that took place in a peaceful and orderly fashion over the years.
          
            Hong Kong residents have become increasingly demanding of their government since the handover and many people are now very vocal about various issues in such ways as joining demonstrations and speaking at public forums. As a Hong Kong resident, this author has seen many fellow citizens of different ages, genders and social backgrounds, even of opposite political inclinations, express their views peacefully and rationally. They manage to show respect despite vastly different political orientations. This is the kind of harmony Hong Kong needs. But some people have resorted to a radical approach to self expression, including use of violence in public protests. Such behavior worries most local residents, who fear Hong Kong's harmonious environment will be destroyed as animosity grows to the detriment of mutual respect.
            
              This author believes economy is the heart of politics and people's well-being the foundation for democracy. That is why consensus is always the ultimate goal no matter how strongly people may disagree with each other. A small number of people like to attract attention with outrageous acts, but the great majority of Hong Kong residents prefer reasonable and rational expression.
              
                In my opinion, the best way to make Hong Kong better has to be sustained development that will improve the quality of life, take good care of the old, create jobs for adults, ensure healthy development of the children and normal lives for those with physical disabilities.
                
                  It has not been long since the new government took over, but already a host of thorny issues have risen up to challenge the authorities, including national education in local primary and secondary schools, non-local women from the mainland seeking to give birth in Hong Kong, housing, surging illegal cross-boundary courier trade and so on. Local residents have new expectations for the new government and hope it will solve their problems with a new work style and new thinking sooner rather than later.
                  
                    Rome was not built in a day and this author understands that the new administration needs time to show its capabilities and believes that advancing the economy, improving people's well-being and developing democracy are not possible without political stability and a harmonious social environment. To allow the government to do its job more effectively, it is crucial for Hong Kong residents not only to voice their opinions, but also to propose pragmatic and practicable solutions to existing problems with adequate support for the government.
                    
                      Recently this author and some like-minded friends submitted some realistic and specific proposals on future development in the hope that CE Leung Chun-ying would take them onboard his first Policy Address. If Leung does so, it will demonstrate to the public that his administration's work style is people first and responds to public concerns in a timely manner. It will also prove that the Leung administration can lay an excellent foundation for Hong Kong's today and future even 10 to 20 years down the road, so that our descendants will have an environment suitable for sustainable development to develop the economy, improve people's livelihood and push constitutional advancement forward.
                      
                        The author is a HK member of the CPPCC, a LegCo member and chairman of the Business and Professionals Alliance for Hong Kong.
                        
(HK Edition 01/18/2013 page3)

