 
Hong Kong of late has been flooded with tension. Young people are not able to afford houses, graduates cannot find ideal jobs, opposition voices advocate the "Occupy Central" movement, and now, the police have become a target for attack. One cannot even imagine the extent of Hong Kong's downfall, yet the facts reveal the worsening of the situation. 
I do think Hong Kong has become sick despite its pride over upholding the law, freedom of speech and civilized culture, all of which its citizens cherish fondly. Although it does not possess the perfect political system, Hong Kong can always boast of its core value that citizens abide by the law; such an honest nature has long been universally acclaimed and stereotyped upon Hong Kong citizens. 
As a law academic in Hong Kong for more than 20 years, I agree that if this core value is shaken, no decent and civilized culture could support it, no matter how perfect the design of the political system. The recent controversy concerning the teacher who swore at a policeman gives a chance to review and reflect on its deeper implications. Hong Kong people should respect and be proud of our police force, thus it is not justifiable to demoralize and lower their esteem by insulting them with foul language. No matter how deep people's dislike of their leader, blame should not be directed at innocent policemen whose responsibility, at risk to their own lives, is to rescue and protect ordinary citizens in times of emergency. 
Instead of weakening their morale, we should cooperate with the police to fight against crimes for the good of the city. But without respectability, even the best-designed political system would fail. Hong Kong, having lost the treasured virtues required for a civilized society and the path towards democracy - forgiveness, mutual respect, encouragement and appreciation - will soon become a mockery. 



Demonstrations are not new in Hong Kong. Having witnessed peaceful demonstrations in previous years, the numerous catastrophes at recent demonstrations have led to anxiety about Hong Kong's future. While some start to appreciate values others are not familiar with, many are worried such demonstrations and struggles will get out of control. 
What has happened to Hong Kong? Has the city become sick? Why are people increasingly concerned by the situation? Even if we disagree with each other over the way and pace towards democracy and universal suffrage, it is undoubtedly our civil duty to defend the virtues of Hong Kong. 
Radical youngsters and demonstrators should not be encouraged to adopt violence as a means to achieve their ideals; we should sell the essence of democracy instead of exploiting it to gain others' support. Everything has good and bad sides; yet before achieving the ultimate goal of democracy, we ought not to parade its deficiencies in front of the public using violent means, as this might lead to unnecessary public worries regarding the road to political reformation, which affects not only politics itself, but more significantly, our next generation, and their values, virtues, expectations and impressions towards Hong Kong. 
The author is a legislative councillor and City University of Hong Kong Law School professor.




(HK Edition 09/24/2013 page1)

