 
The popularity of the Leung Chun-ying administration has continued to fall notwithstanding the tremendous effort that he and his team have made trying to tackle deep-seated problems. Two of the reasons often cited are: First, CY Leung was not popularly elected, and second, the Basic Law does not allow a party that wins in the election to form a government, and therefore the Chief Executive has to sever any link with a party. 
Professor Sonny Lo Shiu-hing of the Hong Kong Institute of Education in a recent column (Mingpao, June 5) made exactly this point. He believes that to resolve the kind of deadlock frequently faced by the SAR government "partyization" of Hong Kong's politics is inevitable. I happen to hold a diametrically opposed view. 
Although I am not a political scientist, I have been studying developments in different countries and have concluded that party politics is essentially divisive. Not only will it not solve any of the problems that the CE is currently facing, but it will certainly make things worse. There is simply no evidence that party politics will eliminate political deadlocks. Indeed many political deadlocks arise from party politics. 
Just take a look at the United States. President Barack Obama has had huge difficulties pushing through his healthcare reform. Mitt Romney is one of the staunchest critics of Obamacare. Yet when he was the Governor of Massachusetts he was the architect of a similar kind of system in his state. Republicans called Obamacare unconstitutional. But why was requiring people to buy health insurance constitutional when it was introduced in Massachusetts and unconstitutional when Obama wanted to extend the principle to all Americans? It was party politics that gave rise to the impasse over the otherwise routine lifting of the debt ceiling in 2011-2012, which almost led to the shutdown of the government. It was party politics that ended in "sequestration" - the mandatory scaling back of government spending that threatens to derail the economic recovery. 



Prof Lo believes the bureau chiefs who bear political responsibility should belong to political parties. Accordingly, political parties should be allowed and encouraged to invite the bureau secretaries to join them. But what benefits will this bring? How will party membership improve the quality of policy? If party membership does not improve the quality of policy but simply implies that whatever policy the bureau chief wants to promote will then command greater support, the end result may not be socially desirable at all. We certainly do not want a bad policy proposal to be given a rubber stamp and given the go-ahead. 
To me, the most important task that a government has to do is to adopt the best set of policies from the social point of view. This means that policies must not be based on political considerations per se. Sometimes, politically popular policies may not be the best policy. Good policy has to be based on good analysis, but party politics often throws objective and careful analysis out of the window, and instead makes policies that are politically popular. Party politics often boils down to a competition for popularity. Where public governance is weak it even degenerates to a power grab for private interests. I have defined the public interest as the ex ante welfare of the representative individual. Suppose we did not know our identities within the community and assume we could be anyone, would we accept a policy proposal given its impact on different people? If so, the policy is welfare-enhancing. This thought experiment frees us from the bias arising from vested interests. 
Prof Lo referred to two Executive Council members who had to step down under public pressure when possible problems came to light regarding the members' integrity. First of all, these problems are still under investigation. Whether or not they involve wrongdoing remains to be seen. But more important is the fact that party politics does not help assure anyone's integrity. In my June 4 article I had referred to Taiwan's leader Ma Ying-jeou and ex-leader Chen Shui-bian. The former is right now facing problems no less serious than those CY Leung faces today in Hong Kong, and that is because several of his key officials had been embroiled in corruption. The latter is still in jail convicted with corruption. Clearly, party politics does not do a thing to eliminate corrupt practices. This is why I keep emphasizing that having an opposition party does not really provide "effective checks and balances". "Effective checks and balances" must be exercised on people, not parties, because in the final analysis it is people who abuse powers. 
For this reason I have always been more interested in ensuring the independence of the judiciary, to uphold the rule of law, than in party politics. For me, constitutional democracy that protects minorities' rights, freedom of the press, and due and transparent processes that prevent power abuses from anyone and especially officials, is far more important than party politics. 
The author is director of the Centre for Public Policy Studies at Lingnan University. 

(HK Edition 06/18/2013 page9)

