 
The opposition's rumor mill recently spewed the "Plan B" fairy tale again, quoting an unnamed source in the pro-establishment camp as saying that intense mass protests, such as the planned "Occupy Central" threat, will come one after another in the coming months if the government's plans for implementing universal suffrage cannot satisfy popular demand. Then, the government would have to use the police to maintain social order or even ask the People's Liberation Army Hong Kong Garrison for help; while the "pan-democracy" parties in the Legislative Council (LegCo) will turn completely radical and deploy filibustering every day to paralyze the legislature. At that point, the government's pro-establishment parties in the LegCo will be unable to control the situation and the central authorities will have no choice, but to replace Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying with someone else. That is the so-called "Plan B" and there's no way Beijing will wait until 2017 to make that move, the unnamed source added, because the replacement needs time to "pick up the pieces" and what not. 
Many people are dying to know who this mysterious "pro-establishment source" is, but, as usual, the pro-opposition press refuses to reveal its real identity. For those who know better, such mental games rely entirely on a seemingly perfect plot without authentication, so believe it at your own peril. 
After Edward Snowden told the whole world about US spying on practically anyone and everyone on this planet, it's time some Hongkongers digested political news reports with a pinch of salt. After all, certain foreign powers have maintained "psychological warfare teams" in Hong Kong for decades to serve their strategies for regional control. Those mind-game experts routinely fabricate plots and tell some former government heavyweight to speak to the press about unsubstantiated troubles in the current HKSAR government. Then they will make up a "Plan B" story to spice up the crisis fairy tale in a manner that sounds like someone with connections in Beijing has let loose the "explosive stuff", nothing out of the "spy world" really. 



The fact is Beijing has officially denied the existence of a "Plan B" every time the rumor surfaces since the very first HKSAR government was sworn in. One can check the back issues of any local newspaper in the past decade or so to find previous versions of this scare-mongering trick. From Tung Chee-hwa to Donald Tsang Yam-kuen and now Leung Chun-ying, every one of them has been targeted by this "Plan B" dart at least once during their term in office. And all of them saw public campaigns to force them out of the CE office time and again. People can expect more of such nonsense in the future for sure, even though the trick has never worked. 
The author of the "Plan B" story warns: "CE Leung should push for universal suffrage for his own future's sake," but what does it really mean? Well, it means the opposition is fighting for "genuine universal suffrage" (which is in fact a false preposition and an unconstitutional freak of political mumbo-jumbo) and CY Leung had better do as he is told, or watch his term in office cut short by the central authorities under pressure from the "Occupy Central" campaign. 
It has been established in the Basic Law all along that a democratically elected nomination committee will nominate candidates for the CE election by universal suffrage eventually, but the opposition has refused to accept this arrangement and has been moving heaven and earth to have it scratched, even by blocking Hong Kong's democratic development. 
The constitutional reform plan introduced in 2005 would have taken Hong Kong's constitutional development a big step forward, but was shot down by the opposition parties in LegCo. That unbelievably stupid move resulted in heavy losses for both the Democratic Party and the Civic Party in the 2008 LegCo elections. It is the opposition parties which have been erecting hurdles in the city's democratic development but, of course, the author of the "Plan B" fairy tale will never acknowledge the truth. That's why CY Leung is faced with such threats. Since nothing that the opposition is doing helps to advance Hong Kong's constitutional development anyway, why not totally ruin it, along with the economy and people's livelihood, "gangland style"? 
The author is a current affairs commentator. This is an excerpted translation of his column published in Wen Wei Po on July 5. 

(HK Edition 07/06/2013 page6)

