 
A journalist's main goal is to ensure the right of citizens to truthful and important information, which allows them to form an adequate impression about social processes, their essence and importance, and about the situation in the world. However, this ideal is forever elusive in modern society. 
There was a time when people took the Fourth Estate seriously. During World War II, publisher of Time and Life magazines Henry Luce asked Robert Hutchins, president of the University of Chicago, to recruit a commission to inquire into the proper function of the media in a modern democracy. After deliberating for four years, Hutchins' Commission on Freedom of the Press (more commonly known simply as the Hutchins Commission) came to the conclusion in 1947 that the press plays an important role in the development and stability of modern society. As such, it is imperative that a commitment of social responsibility be imposed on the mass media. 
Ironically, the words development, stability and responsibility that the Hutchins Commission stressed seem to have no place in our discourse on journalism today. In fact, they strangely resemble words that our officials like to use in their reports. And of course people laugh at these words. "Harmony?" they say, "Give me a break." 
Among the guidelines proposed by the Hutchins Commission, three merit special attention. One is to "present meaningful news, accurate and separated from opinion"; the second is to "serve as a forum for the exchange of comment and criticism and to expand access to diverse points of view"; and the third is to "clarify the goals and values of society; implicit was an appeal to avoid pandering to the lowest common denominator". 



These are similar to the code of ethics created by the US Society of Professional Journalists that are in effect today. The main mantra of the code is "Seek Truth and Report It!" and it urges journalists among other things to "tell the story of the diversity and magnitude of the human experience boldly, even when it is unpopular to do so", to "examine their own cultural values and avoid imposing those values on others", and to "support the open exchange of views, even views they find repugnant". 
Both the Hutchins Commission and the Society of Professional Journalists are saying that proper journalism is a delicate balancing act between conservatism and activism, and between consensus and conflicts. A journalist has to "clarify the goals and values of society", and it also goes without saying to advocate and protect them, but at the same time she also should avoid "pandering to the lowest common denominator". She should "examine her own cultural values and avoid imposing those values on others" and support the open exchange of views even when those views are unpopular and repugnant. 
Journalists in Hong Kong pride themselves on being champions of (their own brand of) democracy. In doing so, they claim that they are representing and promoting the goals and values of our society. While I doubt the representativeness of their ideology, it is professionally unethical of them to impose those values on us anyway, no matter whether those values are "mainstream" or not. But that is what mainstream Hong Kong media do. 
Recently, a few local political activists went to Beijing when the National People's Congress and the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference were having their annual sessions. In this politically sensitive time, they chose to visit the wife of political dissident Liu Xiaobo (also a dissident in her own right that Hong Kong's patriarchal media fail to acknowledge). Naturally, they came into conflict with national security people and in the course of things, Hong Kong journalists reporting the event got roughed up. 
In this interesting event, as well as many others, the line between journalism and activism is blurred. In this form of journalistic activism, events are manufactured at the same time they are reported. When you see news on what happens to reporters, that's not news as we know it, but news in the second or sometimes even the third degree. 
In the late 19th century, newspapers began to publish interviews. They were considered a shocking departure from straight reporting at first, as conducting an interview created an event at the behest and under the control of reporters and editors. If interviews were considered pseudo-events by critics of the day, today's news is filled with nothing but staged events. 
The author is a member of the Commission on Strategic Development. 

(HK Edition 03/13/2013 page1)

