 
The Hong Kong government has finally launched a five-month public consultation on political reform - the statement announced by Chief Secretary Carrie Lam at the SAR's Legislative Council, officially marked the start of a long-anticipated and tortuous road towards the election of the Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017. 
The first round of consultations - in which the government is seeking public views - is expected to focus mainly on some of the most contentious issues. These include the size and composition of the nominating committee, the method of nomination, the number of candidates and voting procedures. 
Up to now, Hong Kong has not yet reached the first of what have become known as the "five-step procedure" for constitutional reform set out by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC). It could take as long as three years before all legal and political obstacles can be cleared to allow the government to roll out concrete and well-thought-out electoral proposals. 
The process towards universal suffrage is destined to be arduous and painful. This is because achieving this goal requires a lot of calculations and compromises by all stakeholders across different political spectrums. This explains why Carrie Lam, who also heads a special team for the public consultation, urged people from all sectors of society to work towards inclusiveness, to reduce their differences, and to forge the broadest possible consensus. 



Despite cheers as the city ushered in a new era, some scholars fear that disjointed pluralism fueled by "one person, one vote" could plunge the city into a governance crisis frequently seen elsewhere. To avoid this, while embracing democracy, the CE election by universal suffrage must be implemented in accordance with the Basic Law, as well as decisions and interpretations by NPCSC, the country's top legislature. This is something Hong Kong people should heed. 
Under the framework of the Basic Law, stipulated in Article 45 in particular, the CE candidates can only be nominated by a broadly representative nominating committee which can be formed referring to the current election committee, and in accordance with democratic procedures. Any attempt to cut corners, bypass or reduce the authority of nominating committee will be time-wasting. 
Among many other criteria, one unalterable principle is that the CE candidates should love Hong Kong and the country. The reason why is obvious - as a special administrative region of China, Hong Kong is directly under the central government. When elected, the CE will be appointed by the central government and is accountable to the central government and the HKSAR government. It is unthinkable that a CE candidate who is against the central government would get Beijing's endorsement. So the CE must love the country and Hong Kong. 
One truth we would like to repeat - Beijing's sincere and solemn promise over universal suffrage can't be in doubt. Since China resumed sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1, 1997, the SAR has successfully implemented "One Country, Two Systems" with wide-ranging democratic rights that Hong Kong people never enjoyed under British colonial rule. On Dec 29, 2007, the NPCSC decided that in 2017, Hong Kong's Chief Executive may be elected by universal suffrage. Ever since then, both the central government and the SAR government have worked very hard to attain this goal. 
The central government's determination and support in progressively advancing the democratic cause, and ultimately achieving universal suffrage in Hong Kong, is a matter of course, because it serves the best interests and aspirations of both Hong Kong and mainland people. Such arrangements, as part of the "One Country, Two Systems", virtually place Hong Kong as a testing ground, a showcase, and the world is watching. If Hong Kong, with a world-acclaimed reputation for rule of law and a high degree of autonomy, can successfully add to its list of civil liberties - one person, one vote for the SAR's leader - the achievement will boost the Chinese "can do" spirit. Therefore, Beijing will do anything in its capacity to make this idea, which was first expounded by Deng Xiaoping, work. 
Hong Kong is about to turn over a new leaf, yet we are arriving at a historic tipping point. As Carries Lam said, "the future is in our hands, we can't afford to stand still, or the whole of society will pay a dear price." In this regard, solidarity is perhaps the most vital prerequisite for the effective implementation of universal suffrage. 
The author is a current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 12/05/2013 page1)

