 
In July 1984, only two months before the Sino-British Joint Declaration was inked, London suddenly announced a plan to introduce democratic reform into the constitutional framework of Hong Kong. From the very beginning, Britain categorically expressed the aim of reform was to create legitimacy for the then colonial ruling and to cultivate political talents in charge of post-1997 governance in the city. 
Since then, London has continuously pushed constitutional reform in the territory while consistently pursuing the target of returning governing power of the territory to people who are loyal to Britain and the Western world as well. Thus, the divergence and conflict between the path of returning to China and the path of democratic reform has become more severe. I define the two paths' divergence and conflict as HK's fundamental political contradiction, which has already run through the last 30 years of the city's history, shaping the political landscape around Victoria Harbour. 
Upon the contradiction, two political camps have been formed; the "Love Nation, Love HK" camp, versus the "pan-democracy" camp. The patriotic camp endeavors to coordinate the path of returning Hong Kong to the motherland and the path of democratic reform in the city. While the opposition tries to duplicate the Western political model and so turn the HKSAR into an independent entity. 
Historical precedent dictates that the United Kingdom and the United States have significant strength and influence in the HKSAR. The local opposition gets endless and full-scale support from its bosses abroad. Therefore, political struggle between the patriots and the opposition has become increasingly fierce. Recently, the decisive political battle has been unfolding as Hong Kong approaches universal suffrage. 



The battle was ushered in by the "Occupy Central" campaign. "Occupy" clearly intends to achieve the goal of so-called real universal suffrage by violating the rule of law in the territory. If Central is occupied by 10,000 people, Hong Kong as an international financial center will cease to operate, and the city's economy will be irreparably damaged. In short, the opposition camp is gambling with political destiny at the cost of 7 million Hong Kong people's livelihoods. 
The patriotic camp has expended much effort in fighting the opposition. People from every walk of the city who love HK and love the nation have endorsed patriotic political groups. In the face of robust and rational rebuttal of the "Occupy" campaign, differences have emerged in the opposition ranks. It is worth noting that even Benny Tai Yiu-ting, the initiator of "Occupy", admitted on Sept 11 that the campaign would not only be harmful to everybody else but also to the campaign's participants. Tai agreed with the prediction that the city's economy would be paralyzed, but still insisted the campaign could solve the constitutional dispute by causing political crisis. 
At this critical point, London piped up. On Sept 14, Hugo Swire, minister of state for the Foreign Office of the United Kingdom, published a Chinese article in Ming Pao newspaper and an English-language opinion piece in the South China Morning Post, saying it was important for Hong Kong people to have a genuine choice in 2017 and that "Britain stands ready to support in any way we can." 
What is the meaning of "Britain stands ready to support in any way"? For the long-pursued target of wholly controlling the HKSAR, London has been prepared to do anything. The United Kingdom isn't reconciled to China resuming the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong. Under political conditions in which 60 percent of HK voters support the "pan-democracy" camp, the former colonist dreams of reassuming control of the territory via universal suffrage. 
The SAR government and the central authorities expressed strong opposition to Swire's words. Top local officials rejected the British offer of support in any way and Beijing urged London to immediately stop any form of interference in Hong Kong's internal affairs. 
Just two days after Swire's article, Li Ka-shing gave a surprising interview to the media. Li not only openly criticized the "Occupy" campaign for its violation of the rule of law, but also promised his conglomerate Cheung Kong (Holdings) Ltd and Hutchison Whampoa wouldn't leave Hong Kong. On the other hand, Li acknowledged that the companies' business would depend on the political and economic situation in the city. As the smartest man both in business and politics, Li's eye-catching comments, to a certain extent, reflect Hong Kong's current political situation. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 09/26/2013 page9)

