 



In a recent interview, the Silent Majority for Hong Kong's Ho Lok-sang pitched against the group's convener Robert Chow Yung. 
"What [Chow] said unnecessarily created enemies for our group," said Ho, referring to Chow's designation of "Occupy Central" as "evil" and the group's causes as "good" while exchanging fire on a radio program with Benny Tai Yiu-ting. "That makes people feel we are confrontational." 
My old friend Ho Lok-sang is not just another pro-establishment figure. Unlike members of the Caring Hong Kong Power, he has a PhD and is worthy of it. He at least realizes that "some of his views may appear contradictory". 
By definition, one cannot make the "silent majority" speak. When it does it is no longer silent. It is an admirable effort to mobilize this group and try to give them a platform to express their views, but in order to be effective we must understand the cause of its silence in the first place. 
Ho's views are given above because it is illustrative of the problem. Ho is living out contradictions of the Hong Kong middle class. His outspokenness and frankness allow us to see how fully he has personified these contradictions. 



On the one hand, he embraces the "universal values" propagated by the West and wants to have all the goodies associated with them, such as democracy, universal suffrage, constitutions and what not. On the other hand, he is desperate for order and stability, and has a tendency to yield to the powers that be. 
The bulk of Hong Kong's middle class was formed in the 1980s and 90s under British rule. They have internalized Western values and were rewarded accordingly to a significant extent. At the same time, the middle class is naturally conservative. Any major redistribution of wealth or readjustment of the game rules is seen as detrimental to their interests. 
While the middle class in Hong Kong is both progressive and conservative, idealistic and pragmatic, when push comes to shove they would always prefer conservatism and pragmatism to change. The apparent lack of principle of this approach was not a problem before because the middle class need not participate politically in the public domain to uphold their interest: their interest was protected by a strong British colonial government. 
The conservatism of the middle class is a global phenomenon, but ours is facing an added disadvantage as it is not accustomed to politics. Hong Kong is no longer an "economic city" and hence the majority's silence is now problematized. Our city has a politics of the rich and a politics of the poor, but the middle class knows of nothing but petty tax rebates. 
The Silent Majority for Hong Kong signals a new wave of middle-class politics, which can counter-balance the recent growth of radical elements that are loosely associated with the grassroots. But for it to be effective, a middle-class politics still needs to present us with a more fully developed discourse. 
This discourse must include a strong element of change. Hong Kong is in deep economic, social and political trouble. We cannot simply ask our fellow middle-class citizens to accept this fact and stay at home while others occupy Central to demand progress. We have to come up with an alternative blueprint, and show Hongkongers it is equally attractive, but more feasible and less disruptive. 
The status quo is indefensible, and therefore it is impossible to mobilize the majority to resist change or the call for change. To prevent "Occupy" from happening, we must strip the dissidents of their monopoly on change and become the change leaders or at least the alternative change leaders. 
The author is a member of the Commission on Strategic Development. 

(HK Edition 09/03/2013 page1)

