
Country's achievements over the last four years are recognized by the UN's Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review
The Universal Periodic Review mechanism is aimed at reviewing the human rights records of all members of the United Nations every four years. The first review of the human rights situation in China was successfully completed in 2009, and the second report on China was adopted by the UPR Working Group on Oct 25.


Wu Haitao (C), deputy head of the Chinese delegation, speaks during the 17th session of the Human Rights Council's Universal Periodic Review (UPR) Working Group in Geneva on Oct 25, 2013. The report of the second round of the UPR on China was adopted on Friday by the Working Group on the UPR of the HRC. [Photo / Xinhua]
Wu Hailong, China's foreign ministry special envoy and head of the Chinese delegation, delivered an opening statement at the second review, giving an overall account of the progress China has made in human rights since the first review.
Despite the looming global financial crisis, China's economy has continued to grow vigorously and its human rights development has also progressed rapidly. The government has promoted human rights in a planned manner, completing the implementation of the National Human Rights Action Plan of China (2009-10) published in 2009, and publishing the new National Human Rights Action Plan of China (2012-15) in 2012.
China's legislature has adopted amendments to the Criminal Code, the Law on the Protection of the Rights and Interests of the Elderly, and others closely related to human rights protection. By 2012, new pension insurance schemes covered all rural areas and urban residents, achieving the targeted goal eight years ahead of time.
China's key indicators of health are among the highest of developing countries, and the average life expectancy of Chinese people is now 75 years. China has achieved many goals, including the targets for poverty reduction and education, ahead of the UN Millennium Development Goals schedule.
