 







 
SMHK co-conveners (from left) Robert Chow Yung, Chinese University of Hong Kong political scientist Chang Chak-yan and Lingnan University's public policy professor Ho Lok-sang at the launch of Silent Majority for Hong Kong earlier this month. 







 
Patrick Ko Tat-pun's Voice of Loving Hong Kong is also in the fray, warning 'Occupy Central' advocates they 'must know the limits.'



Opponents and supporters of the 'Occupy Central' campaign are set for a drawn-out showdown as the threat of a total shutdown of Hong Kong's core business district draws near. The city's 'silent majority' has been told to speak up against the movement before chaos erupts. SL Luo reports. 
"They've got me all wrong," laments Robert Chow Yung, occasionally raising his voice and thumping his fists, when told that he was being viewed with hostility after he had barged into the center of the dispute over the "Occupy Central" plan to take over the core business district. 
"Come on, I'm no politician. What ulterior motives do I have? If you promote peace, people say you're working for someone else. So what? I've no links with the mainland. I only go there occasionally to play golf," says Chow, rallying to his own defense. 
Chow is no stranger to media exposure. With more than four decades on the Hong Kong media scene, he's earned a reputation as a down-to-earth newsman, broadcast administrator and sharp-tongued host of radio and television programs. 
What has infuriated the political opposition and Chow's long-time critics, however, is his latest role, as one of the six co-conveners of the political action group, Silent Majority For Hong Kong - a united front formed to challenge University of Hong Kong law professor, Benny Tai Yiu-ting's "Occupy Central" threat. 
Critics taken aback 
Old time colleagues, even critics were surprised when Chow, who has directed some of his most barbed comments at the government on his radio and TV programs, lined up with the government on the "Occupy Central" issue. 
One rival broadcaster asked whether Chow was looking for a way to "carve out a new niche" in the local broadcast scene after his high-profile exit from Radio Television Hong Kong last year. 
SMHK holds that Tai and the entire "Occupy Central" movement are putting Hong Kong's future on the line, undermining the rule of law and creating a threat to the livelihood of the people. "I'm doing it for the economic interests of the average man on the street and to safeguard the people's living standards," Chow told China Daily as he took a swipe back at those out to discredit what he calls his "righteous" intentions. 
"I've no political aims," he argues. "I've not run in any election or sought political office in Hong Kong. Why should I do it now when I'm already 63. Come the next elections, I'll be 66. You must be joking. I don't want everybody abusing me in the newspapers." 



How large is Chow's "silent majority"? He says about five million people are still sitting on the fence. They haven't voted in elections nor taken any active role in the ongoing political wrangling. 
"We want to appeal to this group and say: Can't we have democracy without chaos or disturbance? If we can get them to tell Benny Tai: Don't do it, we just want democracy, no chaos please, we'll have succeeded," says Chow. 
Chow denies that he's "switched camps" after his long history of slamming one SAR administration after another. 
"A journalist must be seen to be fair. I can't be against every government policy. A good guy can do a bad thing and a bad guy can do a good thing. You ought to look at the deeds, not the person. I'm not guilty of the charges hurled at me. I'm doing this to save Hong Kong from having to repeat history - like in 1978, 1979, SARS and the financial tsunamis. Why risk everything?" 
SMHK's goal, ultimately, is to muster at least 100,000 people to sign up and tell Benny Tai to desist from his plan to occupy Central. "We've already got 10,000 pledges of support for our movement. We are only 10 days old. This is just the beginning," says Chow. 
The movement already has raised a war chest of more than HK$1 million to wage its campaign, including full-page newspaper advertisements. 
Anarchy warning 
Chow admits his greatest worry is that "Occupy Central" could create a major, extended disruption that could destroy the central government's aim at building Hong Kong's economy. 
"I'm appealing to the people of Hong Kong to get this straight. Do you want to see anarchy and financial ruin in Hong Kong? Do you want to see people pulling their investments out of here, selling their stocks and property prices hitting rock bottom? If not, speak up." 
Ho Lok-sang, another of SMHK's co-conveners and a regular commentator for China Daily Hong Kong Edition, argues that Tai and his movement are damaging the rule of law, and attempting to hold the city hostage to press their views on universal suffrage. 
"My views are absolutely clear. Hong Kong is a free society and everyone has the right to speak out. As long as there's no violence, the people's daily lives are not disrupted and it's not against the law, there's not much of a problem," Ho says. 
Another pro-government group, the Voice of Loving Hong Kong (VLHK), welcomed Chow's moveent, saying it has come at a time when the people's patience is wearing thin over political obstructionism that has hamstrung the city. 
Chairman Patrick Ko Tat-pun says his group will co-operate with SMHK, adding that his group also has amassed a war chest to counter Tai's plan to choke the streets of Central with 10,000 protesters in July 2014. 
Ko's organization plans to distribute about one million badges to allow the people of Hong Kong to show their opposition to "Occupy Central". He says VLHK will organize lectures at schools and set up a watchdog to report "criminal activities" to the authorities. 
SMHK itself has promised not to take a political role. Chow says he wants to engage "Occupy Central" in a verbal battle or even a contest of wit and strategy, but in the end the objective remains - to ensure Hong Kong people don't lose their savings and that the city's core values are not discarded. 
"I don't need people to like me. I just don't want the people of Hong Kong to be hurt in their pocket books. 
"I've had a very interesting life. I've done a lot. What more could I want than to see the rights things happening, and to be happy about it," Chow says. 
Contact the writer at theam@chinadailyhk.com




(HK Edition 08/23/2013 page3)

