 
Last Monday I had the honor of being a speaker at a luncheon hosted by the SME Global Alliance and co-organized with other trade associations and NGOs. The topic was: "Has Hong Kong's political system jeopardized economic development and growth?" Having thought long and hard about this subject, my conclusion is: contrary to what is often believed, the impasse facing the Leung Chun-ying administration as he and his cabinet struggle to launch policy initiatives is not so much because our political system is not democratic enough as because we suffer a lack of democratic culture. 
Such a conclusion will surely surprise many people. Some sympathizers of the "Occupy Central" movement, for example, author Chan Koon-chung, argue that Hong Kong is like a Titanic heading into a huge iceberg, such that political reform to bring universal suffrage is necessary to avoid an imminent disaster. The implicit assumption is that Hong Kong is ready for democracy, but because our election system is not democratic enough, the Chief Executive (CE) is running into problems. But the implicit assumption is wrong. As much as I support universal suffrage and a fair and open system of the election of the CE, my reading of the Hong Kong political scene is that the difficulties facing the administration are due to a lack of democratic culture. 
So what constitutes a democratic culture? I define a democratic culture as a culture consistent with the smooth functioning of a democratic system. My argument is that in the absence of such culture, democratization of the electoral system may make things even worse than they are now. If all the interest groups in Hong Kong use the political system to seek their narrow self-interests, each trying to elect a CE who will best benefit them, the system will readily become corrupt and may not benefit Hong Kong over the long term at all. 



I see a democratic culture as consisting of at least the following six elements: First, a respect for due processes and the rule of law. This implies that one is prepared to accept the outcome of a due process even if the outcome is contrary to what one likes. 
Second, a respect for freedom of thought, freedom of speech, and freedom of the press. This implies that one will avoid disrupting others' speeches, branding others as evil, threatening others for voicing disagreeable opinions, and physically hurting others for expressing disagreeable points of view. 
Third, a readiness to avoid conflicts of interest. If someone has a direct conflict of interest, one should avoid being involved in the decision-making process. This does not mean that one cannot speak up and express concerns over how a policy may affect one. Everyone should be encouraged to speak up for or against a policy. There need not be a concern about conflicts of interest when speaking up. The conflict of interest becomes an issue only when one gets involved in the decision-making process. 
Fourth, a readiness to express one's thoughts based on conscience. All members of the Legislative Council (LegCo) are individuals in the law-making body. If a LegCo member is somehow pressured by his party to vote with the party, the political party is not democratic. A democratic LegCo needs decisions based on members' personal and genuine assessment of policies. 



Fifth, a commitment to the public interest rather than the party's interest. Democracy exists to serve the public interest, not political party interest. This implies that filibusters aimed at political gain at the expense of public interest should be avoided. 
And the last is an understanding of what constitutes the public interest. 
I submit that the democratic culture as I describe above does not typically characterize any of our existing democracies in the world. That is exactly why political parties have such notoriety for being the world's most corrupt organizations, and why democracy does not enjoy such a good reputation. 
As much as I would like to see universal suffrage in Hong Kong for the election of the next CE, I contend that the more urgent task at hand is to cultivate a democratic culture in the city. 
The author is director of the Center for Public Policy Studies at Lingnan University. 

(HK Edition 10/08/2013 page9)

