 
A top-level conference focusing on China's diplomatic work in neighboring countries was held on Oct 24 and 25, attended by all the seven members of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee. Party General Secretary and President Xi Jinping delivered an important speech. The new Chinese leadership is unprecedentedly strengthening China's relations with its neighbors. 
In blueprinting China's strategy for promoting and improving its ties with neighboring countries, President Xi advocated a new concept - common destiny - in his speech. "We should clearly present our policies to the outside world, tell China's story in an acceptable way, speak out so that we are heard, and interpret the Chinese dream from the perspective of the aspirations of all people in all countries for a better life and regional prosperity, and let the sense of common destiny take root with our neighbors," Xi said. 
Hong Kong people are familiar with the term "common destiny," but by a different definition. Nine years ago, in early 2004, when the opposition camp instigated public malice against the central government, some local scholars elaborately waged a campaign to uphold and defend the city's so-called "common destiny." It was the first time the concept had appeared in the community. Although thereafter the term has been frequently replaced by "Hong Kong core values", the same tenet - maintaining the city's historic heritage intact - has been consistently promoted. However, this deeply contradicts with the HKSAR's economic integration with the mainland. 
The opposition has since continued to obstruct Hong Kong's integrating with the mainland. Recently, a handful of extremists, including Alliance for True Democracy convener Joseph Cheng Yu-shek; "Occupy Central" organizer Reverend Chu Yiu-ming and Labour Party lawmaker Lee Cheuk-yan, went on to collude with pro-independence forces in Taiwan. 
But, Taiwan's independence movement is already in a blind alley. Since the Kuomintang took charge of governing Taiwan, the pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) has sunk into a predicament. On the other hand, the majority of Hong Kong people oppose or are disgusted with Taiwan independence. Hong Kong's opposition, in colluding with Taiwan independence forces, is in a blind alley too. 
At this critical point, President Xi's concept of "let the sense of common destiny take root with our neighbors", not only directs our whole country on how to handle its relations with our neighbors, it also helps to steer the HKSAR out of its wrong path. 



China's "common destiny" with its neighbors contains at least two major facets. One is to create a new pattern of regional economic integration. Only through deeper integration of China's interests with its neighbors can these countries benefit from China's development and vice versa. The other is to advance security cooperation with neighboring countries, actively participate in regional and sub-regional security cooperation, and enhance cooperation mechanisms and strategic mutual trust. 
Needless to say, it's a new common destiny for the region and Hong Kong is part of that. This long-range target can be achieved because it fits soundly with reality. First, since the advent of the new century, globalization has been accelerating and deepening with information globalizing via worldwide Internet. Meanwhile, economic globalization has turned into a so-called "gated globe" - that is the world economy continuing to be intertwined and interconnected with various nations and regions. But, a variety of regional economic integration has been developed speedily. Second, but not the least important, is that the center of gravity of the world economy, finance and politics has been shifting from West to East. China's building of a common destiny with its neighbors is going with the tide of historical development. As part of China, Hong Kong just cannot afford to go against the trend. 
The historical tendency is irresistible and irreversible. Regarding the relationship with Taiwan, the Ninth Cross-Strait Economic, Trade and Culture Forum, held on Oct 26 and 27, proposed reinvigorating the Chinese nation through closer comprehensive cooperation. The concept of "the two sides are a family" and the awareness of "common destiny across the Taiwan Strait" is being reinforced. 
At present, Hong Kong's top priority is to stop the "Occupy Central" campaign. In the long run, the city must look ahead and say "good-bye" to nostalgia, and decisively integrate with the mainland. Otherwise, the HKSAR will lose out in grabbing the great opportunities Beijing has offered in building a new common destiny with its neighbors. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 11/06/2013 page1)

