 



The Hong Kong Celebrations Association (HKCA) held a press conference on Monday to publicize a series of events it plans to stage in celebration of the 16th anniversary of the Hong Kong SAR on July 1. 
Since the handover Hong Kong has made proud achievements in all aspects of life, including the economy, people's well-being and constitutional development, thanks to generous support from the central government and joint efforts by local citizens. 
Celebrating the anniversary with various events will unite the public, enhance social harmony and radiate positive energy. People from all walks of life should join efforts with one heart and one will to stage the celebrations well and let the "Pearl of the East" shine ever brighter with local residents' love for Hong Kong and common desire to develop their hometown by working together for better or worse and caring for one another. 
In the past 16 years Hong Kong has proved the unprecedented "One Country, Two Systems" principle a great success with unforeseen achievements on all fronts, thanks to unreserved support from the central government and joint efforts by its strong-willed and hard-working citizens. 
The city has remained the freest economy in the world for 19 years running, while its position as an international financial center is firmer and deeper than ever; its rule of law remains intact and effective; society clean; flow of information free; foreign trade and investment busy as ever; and continues to attract investments from overseas like a powerful magnet does iron and steel. 
Hong Kong's core political values such as democracy, rule of law and freedom have grown as well, while its constitutional development continues to progress. 
The series of celebrations organized by the HKCA will be staged under the general theme of joining hands in celebrating the handover anniversary and spreading love. A total of 37 events will be held over three days, including July 1, in all 18 districts of the city. Hong Kong is home to more than 7 million people. It is every Hong Kong citizen's responsibility to take care of their common home and build it into an even better place to live. 
This is an excerpted translation of a Wen Wei Po editorial published on June 18. 

(HK Edition 06/19/2013 page9)

