 
The growing politicization within universities in Hong Kong, as exemplified by the controversy surrounding the appointment of the new presidents for Lingnan University and the Open University of Hong Kong, is a most troubling development. Politicization within university campuses is inconsistent with academic freedom and freedom of speech, and even violates the basic rights of the university faculty, staff and students. Within a university, everyone should be judged solely on his or her academic and professional qualification and performance. A person's political inclination should be of no relevance whatsoever in terms of appointments and promotions. In fact, everyone, faculty, staff and students, should have the right to reveal or not to reveal his or her political inclinations. 



The selected candidates for the presidents of Lingnan University and Open University, respectively Prof Leonard Cheng Kwok-hon and Prof Wong Yuk-shan, were opposed by some members of the respective universities on the grounds that they were supporters of the Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying. Such views should have no place in academic communities. The selection of presidents and for that matter all academic staff should be based solely on their ability and experience. There should not be a political litmus test. Would these gentlemen be more qualified academically and professionally if they had supported Henry Tang Ying-yen or Albert Ho Chun-yan in the 2012 election for the Chief Executive of Hong Kong? We must avoid establishing such dangerous precedents in either direction: whether or not a person supports or supported the Chief Executive should not be a consideration at all. That is why an elaborate search procedure has been set up in order to protect the integrity of the search process. We must respect the process, no matter how unhappy we may be with the outcome. 
In the 2000 United States presidential election, Al Gore won the popular vote, but the US Supreme Court decided that George W. Bush won the election in Florida, and hence the electoral votes to become the president. Gore accepted the Supreme Court decision immediately, in part out of respect for the integrity of the US governmental institutions and in part because it was in the interests of the US to avoid any prolonged uncertainty on the leadership of the nation. 
I remember when I was an undergraduate at Stanford University in the early 1960s, I had a teacher, Prof Paul Baran, a distinguished Marxist scholar in the Department of Economics. Prof Baran had at the time visited Fidel Castro's Cuba, an act unpardonable to conservatives in the US. The conservative Stanford alumni put a great deal of pressure on the university administration to dismiss the professor, and even offered a very large donation to the university if it would do so. The Stanford administration stood firm and rebuffed the alumni, even though they did not necessarily approve of Prof Baran's personal actions. Academic freedom is about allowing people to say whatever they want to say and do whatever they want to do, no matter how unpopular and politically incorrect, without consequences on their academic advancement, as long as they fulfill their academic obligations. 
When I was vice-chancellor of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, I tried to make sure that the university itself did not take sides in politics - so that individual members of the university could have all the freedom to do and say whatever they wanted, including active participation in the political process in Hong Kong. For example, Prof Kuan Hsin-chi, a distinguished faculty member in the department of government and public administration, served as the founding chairman of the Civic Party of Hong Kong. 



Our system of justice is based on the correctness of the process. If people do not respect and safeguard the integrity of the process and accept only the outcomes they personally like and reject the others, it can result in chaos. Such an attitude fundamentally does not respect the rule of law, and without the rule of law, democracy cannot work. One important function of the rule of law is the protection of the minority; the majority does not need protection in a democracy. 
Both Prof Cheng and Prof Wong have excellent proven track records as scholars and as administrators. They were chosen after proper search processes. Both are eminently qualified to lead their respective universities. As a society committed to the rule of law, we should respect and accept the outcomes of due processes even if we may dislike them personally. Otherwise our society will descend into chaos, as happened in Thailand a couple of years ago and is happening in Egypt before our eyes now. Democracy succeeds not because the majority wins, but because the minority is willing to accept that it has lost this time and that it knows that despite its loss its rights are still protected by law. I urge the faculty, staff and students at both institutions to practice mutual tolerance and cooperation for the good of their institutions. 
The author is Ralph and Claire Landau professor of economics, at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and Kwoh-Ting Li professor in economic development, Emeritus, at Stanford University. 

(HK Edition 07/31/2013 page9)

