 
Some local political scientists, when discussing the relationship between Hong Kong's democratic development and government administration, have long insisted that full democracy and mature party politics are key conditions for the government to maintain effective administration. Some of them have gone so far as to state that all the problems currently facing Hong Kong will be gone once full democracy and party politics are established, citing the US as a perfect example. 
Unfortunately reality is cruel, as the Republican and Democratic lawmakers have finally succeeded in shutting down the federal government for the first time since 1996 after staging a slew of political farces. As a result no one will clear away the garbage in the streets of Washington DC that piles up at a pace of some 500 tons a week; the federal government has to delay issuing corporate loans, mortgage loans and social security handouts; all national parks, the National Zoo and National Museum are temporarily closed; many federal government employees are on unpaid leave; military servicemen and servicewomen are now protecting national security without salary, and so on. According to an estimate by economists at Goldman Sachs, the US will lose the equivalent of at least $8 billion in economic losses a week during the government shutdown. 
The US is known for a "reputable democratic system" and mature party politics that has seen the two dominant parties take turns running the federal government since the 1950s, but in recent years, the country has been repeatedly pushed to the verge of government shutdown and the threat of financial crisis caused by the government's inability to pay national debt; while the healthcare reform President Barack Obama has been vigorously pushing for in the past few years has hardly seen any significant and substantial progress. If this is any indication, the close link between democracy and effective administration is perhaps just a beautiful dream after all. 



Of course some local scholars hold a rational understanding of the relationship between democracy and effective administration. Professor Richard Wong Yue-Chim, a lecturer at the School of Economics and Finance of the University of Hong Kong, published an article in a local newspaper back in 2011, in which he wrote: "The fragmentation of politics is a symptom of all developed societies. In Hong Kong, where political parties and representative politics are still new, that fragmentation is already in full manifestation. Government becomes naturally weak and paralyzed. 
Some commentators argue that the symptoms are a result of the failure of Hong Kong to have full democracy and mature political parties. Without the right to capture power through the ballot box, political parties in Hong Kong cannot aggregate divided interests. But what we observe in all countries where the ballot box is present is that politics everywhere is hopelessly divided. I conjecture that the fragmentation of politics in Hong Kong, as elsewhere, is more the symptom of a knowledge society where economic and social sector organizations are well developed and increasingly entrenched. They have not found a common discourse through which diverse and divided views can be adequately aggregated." 
Indeed, weak government administration and serious fragmentation of politics are very common among countries and regions with universal suffrage around the world; while it is not rare among heads of governments and political parties to be unable to muster broad popular support, establish legitimacy and implement major economic policies. 
Charles A. Kupchan, a Georgetown University scholar, said in an interview with German magazine Der Spiegel last year that the Western world is experiencing a crisis in administration. Popularly elected governments are better suited for distributing benefits than asking parties concerned to make sacrifices when necessary. There is a view today in academic communities and political circles overseas that legislatures impaired by lack of vision are so focused on special interests to the neglect of the overall interest of society they cannot see beyond their own standings, build consensus or reflect popular wishes, allowing situations to occur time and again where important policy decisions cannot be made or implemented. 
This brings us to the conclusion that democracy does not equal effective administration and full democracy and mature party politics are not enough to establish effective, responsive administration, or build political consensus. There is no doubt that Hong Kong needs democratic development toward universal suffrage, but that does not mean the SAR can ignore everything else and think it is the only thing that matters. Hong Kong has a valuable tradition of pragmatism and rationalism. The pragmatic and effective thing to do is rationally build consensus, support and help the government develop the economy, improve people's well-being and contribute to Hong Kong's overall interest going forward. 
The author is a current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 10/12/2013 page6)

