


      The Alliance for True Democracy (ATD) recently announced three plans for the 2017 Chief Executive (CE) Election by universal suffrage, but it was apparently halfhearted about the three options, because even the opposition camp itself knows two of the three stands absolutely no chance of getting through the "front gate".
      
        Take option 2 for example; it suggests dividing Hong Kong into 20 constituencies and selecting a 200-member nomination committee (NC) by proportional representation. That means the existing NC selection system will be completely abandoned. Option 3 wants the NC to be comprised of current members of the Legislative Council (LegCo) and district councils. It is also in total violation of the National People's Congress Standing Committee's (NPCSC) decision.
        
          The ATD is serious only about option 1, which demands the NC include members of the existing CE Election Committee and 400 district councillors directly elected by popular vote or whoever endorsed by 2 percent of voters in writing. Only this one is the real deal the ATD is betting on; while the other two are just bluffing.
          
            Why is option 1 the only real deal? One can find the answer in the Apple Daily editorial published the day after the ATD plans came out. The opposition mouthpiece spoke highly of option 1 in the editorial: "It complies with Article 45 of the Basic Law that the existing CE Election Committee format be preserved, but adds another 400 members endorsed by legitimate voters, making all voters part of a generalized NC. It does not cross the line in terms of specific provisions or spirit of the Basic Law and is therefore worth considering." The opposition camp and sympathetic media have been singing the praises of option 1 ever since the three were introduced to the public, dismissing options 2 and 3 as being too controversial for their own good.
            
              However, is option 1 as nice as the opposition claims? Not really, because it includes endorsement by voters in writing, which not only violates the rule on institutional nomination but also indirectly renders the NC powerless. That does not comply with the Basic Law or relevant decisions of the NPCSC at all.
              
                The author is a current affairs commentator. This is an excerpted translation of his column published in Wen Wei Po on July 16.
                
(HK Edition 07/19/2013 page1)

