 
Few diplomats have made news like Gary F. Locke. So the news that the US ambassador to China will leave office early next year has attracted widespread media attention, not different from that seen when he was chosen to take up the post two years ago. 
Although China's Foreign Ministry has praised Locke's efforts to improve China-US ties, perhaps his least controversial achievement is the reduction in the waiting time for visa for Chinese applicants. 
However, the controversies surrounding Locke - from his PM2.5 squabble on air pollution and some Chinese breaking into the US embassy to the US surveillance in Chinese cities - were less because of his working style or personality and more because of the contradictions in China-US relations. 
Locke's posting in China coincided with the high-profile "pivot to Asia" strategic policy that the US launched in late 2011. And Locke-related news often sparked heated debates because of the growing China-US trust deficit owing to the "pivot to Asia" policy. 
Before Locke's arrival, the Chinese media pinned high hopes on the first Chinese American ambassador to China. That Locke was also the first Chinese American governor of a state and secretary of commerce added to the expectations. In American society where Asian Americans are a fragmented group with low political participation, Locke's life from a poor third-generation migrants' family to a Yale graduate and eventually a political star is the stuff that the American Dream is made of, which emphasizes equality, opportunity and individual struggle. 
However, Locke's low-key arrival in China triggered speculations. His simple, frugal lifestyle - reflected in buying coffee with coupons, business trips in economic class, and refusal to be put up in five-star hotels - divided the Chinese media. Some media outlets hailed him for his low-key style which contrasted with some Chinese officials' luxurious lifestyle, while others accused him of doing so to "shame" Chinese officials. 
In fact, despite the restrictions on the US government budget, wastes of public fund in the US have been exposed from time to time. And in China, there are many frugal officials who deserve more media attention than Locke. But bad news about some officials' luxurious lifestyle always sells better than good stories such as that a deputy mayor of Wuhu, Anhui province sent her daughter to school by bike everyday. 
Locke's low-key lifestyle shouldn't have drawn much attention. But the "pivot to Asia" policy of the US, which many Chinese believe is aimed at containing China's rise, led to a war of words with Locke and his embassy. 
When the US embassy in China started releasing its own data on PM2.5 (particulate matter with a diameter of 2.5 micrometer or less suspended in the air and harmful to human health), China's environmental authorities in June 2012 termed the practice an interference in the country's domestic politics. 
The debate over PM2.5 reflected the gap in the perception of environmental protection between the US-led developed countries and China-led developing countries. It is and will be unrealistic to expect the largest developing country to meet the developed countries' environmental standards after only three decades of reform and opening-up. 
There is little doubt that Chinese people, too, yearn for better air quality and the Chinese government is determined to change its economic development model to protect the environment. The Chinese authorities included PM2.5 in the air quality index in 26 cities from 2012, and extended the practice to 74 cities in 2013. There is no denying, though, that the US embassy played a catalyst's role in China including PM2.5 to monitor air quality. 
That the US allowed some Chinese to seek asylum in its embassy and consulate made China-US relations more complicated. It not only intensified tensions between the two countries over human rights, but also, in effect, provided further evidence to people who believe that the US is eager to contain China by tarnishing its image and interfering in its internal affairs. 
The US global surveillance scandal has put US embassies, including the one in China, in an awkward position. It has exposed the hypocrisy of the US - while the US claims to promote "freedom" and "democracy" in other countries, it keeps the whole world under its scrutiny. The German media reported the US surveillance program, through its embassy and consulates, has targeted many Chinese cities, including Beijing, Shanghai and Chengdu in Sichuan province. 
While the Chinese media have ridiculed the US for its hypocrisy, the Chinese people have refrained from publicly protesting against the US as Indonesians did against US ally Australia for spying on Indonesian leaders. This could be a sign that China doesn't want the US surveillance program, damaging as it is, to hurt overall China-US relations because of the bilateral ties' importance for both countries as well as the rest of the world. 
A new style power relationship between China and the US cannot be built in a day. As important as an ambassador is, he is still just a piece on the chessboard in the making of a new power relationship between China and the US. So no matter who replaces Locke as the next US ambassador to China, such frictions will continue, although overall China-US relationship will remain steady. 
The author is an editor with China Daily.

(China Daily 11/27/2013 page9)

