


      Nothing appeals to Hong Kong's opposition lawmakers and academics more than the illusion that they represent the people. Nothing enraptures them more than the feeling that they are the only champions of Hong Kong democracy. Nothing, however, is further from the truth. The truth is that the manner in which opposition lawmakers and anti-Beijing university dons plan to launch their "campaigns for democracy" is undemocratic, opaque and exclusive. A case in point is the planned "Occupy Central" campaign propagated by University of Hong Kong law professor Benny Tai Yiu-ting and espoused by opposition lawmaker Albert Ho Chun-yan.
      
        Earlier last week, Tai, in tandem with Ho, reformulated his original proposal to form an illegal blockade and take over Central, unveiling a four-step roadmap for the campaign and contending that only by taking such drastic steps will universal suffrage happen in Hong Kong. The news was splashed in headlines across several leading newspapers on Friday. More noteworthy is that the new roadmap, unlike Tai's initial proposal, has relegated the proposed act of civil disobedience - occupation of Central - to a last resort. But, the first three steps - deliberation day, electronic voting and instigating a by-election as a referendum on universal suffrage after Ho gives up his legislative seat - remain in the spotlight.
        
          Sadly, both Tai and Ho, despite their self-proclamations as "democrats", have adopted a top-down and undemocratic approach to devising the four steps without extensive consultations with the public. Before unveiling their roadmap, they only had a dialogue with a dozen scholars and politicians, neglectful of public views and shying away from an opinion poll on their concept of "Occupy Central". Such an undemocratic style of leadership in social movement not only renders their campaign problematic, but also out of touch.
          
            According to their roadmap, the first step is deliberation day. Drawing on the academic concept of "Deliberation Day" proposed by American scholars J. Fishkin and B. Ackerman, Tai proposed that on a certain day next year, 10,000 citizens would be amassed, in small groups of 10 each, to discuss and come up with a proposal to achieve universal suffrage.
            
              Yet, in my view, the ways in which both Tai and Ho would complete the first step are opaque and undemocratic. A lot of questions about the viability and credibility of this step remain unanswered. How can Tai and Ho gather 10,000 people to jettison their work or holidays in favor of being deliberators in focus groups? According to Fishkin and Ackerman, each deliberator would be paid $150 for a day's work of deliberation in the United States. Will Tai and Ho also follow suit? Will the lure of money damage the independence of the deliberative interaction? Is it possible for the organizers of deliberation day to impartially sum up all the views of 10,000 deliberators and come up with only one proposal in just one day? Will 10,000 people be able to represent 7 million Hong Kong people in picking the best universal suffrage proposal? Will the interests of the minority undemocratically overwhelm those of the majority by taking step one?
              
                In fact, the academic concept of "Deliberation Day" is no less contentious even in the US. As the US political scientist Arthur Lupia has perceptively pointed out, the Achilles' heel of "Deliberation Day" is the fact that it is based on idealized versions of human nature, rather than on genuine political behavior. Many studies, according to Lupia, reveal that deliberative interaction could actually be misleading to less educated voters. More importantly, deliberative interaction, as Harvard professor Jane Mansbridge noted, "accentuates rather than redressing the disadvantage of those with the least power in society."
                
                  Likewise, the second step - endorsement of the universal suffrage proposal by electronic voting - is problematic. How can Tai and Ho ensure that the result of electronic voting is reliable, fair and representative? Will the electronic voting exclude the elderly or less-educated working class who are unable to gain access to the Web?
                  
                    The third step - a by-election as a referendum as proposed by Ho - equally doesn't make sense and goes against the will of the vast majority of Hong Kong people. It is common knowledge that during the 2010 by-election as a referendum triggered by the resignation of five opposition lawmakers, the turnout rate was the lowest (17 percent) since the handover, indicating that such a by-election is usually superfluous and botched. The vast majority of Hong Kong people tend to denounce the 2010 by-election as a waste of taxpayers' money. Unfortunately, Ho has not learned a lesson from the 2010 political farce. Nor has he shown any willingness to openly conduct an opinion poll on public support for a by-election as a referendum triggered by his irresponsible resignation.
                    
                      The fourth step - taking over Central in the name of civil disobedience as proposed by Tai - is much more anti-democratic. As some Western scholars argued, civil disobedience in an open and inclusive society very often puts pressure on the state to privilege the interests of the civilly disobedient minority over the majority. Even Audrey Eu Yuet-mee, another opposition leader, recently questioned the idea of "Occupy Central," saying: "While 10,000 people are really coming out to occupy Central, 100,000 people will come out to complain about the act of civil disobedience which is disrupting their routine work."
                      
                        Will such an undemocratic roadmap deepen our quest for genuine democracy in Hong Kong? I doubt it.
                        
                          The author is a lecturer at the College of Professional and Continuing Education, Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
                          
(HK Edition 03/14/2013 page1)

