 



The Alliance for Democracy wants to change the end of the annual July 1 protest march this year to a spot in the heart of Central and hold a mass rally there. Chan Wai-yip, a leading member of the radical group People Power, went a step further by stating that "breaking the law" is exactly what "Occupy Central" aims to do, to the point that PLA troops have to be called in to restore order. "That will attract global attention," he added. Claiming July 1 is the time to "start a revolution", Chan also urged Hong Kong residents to paralyze traffic in Central with their private vehicles on July 1. 
All these moves and threats tell us the nature of the annual event has changed, from a way for members of the public to express their opinions and aspirations to the prelude to "Occupy". Apparently the radical groups are set to wreak havoc in Central at the end of the annual march with such illegal acts as charging on police lines and blocking traffic. 
Chan and fellow opposition politician Wong Yuk-man have recently been found guilty of illegal assembly by a district court and sentenced to four months in prison, suspended for two years. The crime they committed in 2011 that has given them a criminal record in addition to imprisonment is exactly what they are urging people to do on July 1. That means anyone who follows their example on Monday could be charged with the same crime, found guilty in a court of law, sentenced to a similar prison and carry the stigma of ex-con on their back for the rest of their lives. Since the nature of the July 1 march has changed, Hong Kong residents have no reason to be used by the opposition as pawns. 
Certain opposition leaders insist that the annual march is not a dress rehearsal of "Occupy". Their intention can only be to deceive the public that it is still a way to express opinions peacefully, even though the radical faction of the opposition camp has already decided to violate relevant law and regulations when the crowd reaches the end of the march in Central. When the criminal acts mentioned above happen on July 1 the police officers on the scene will have no choice but to stop them and remove the traffic blockers by force if necessary. 
The author is a current affairs commentator. This is an excerpted translation of his article published in Hong Kong Commercial Daily on June 28. 

(HK Edition 06/29/2013 page6)

