


      The speech of Zhang Dejiang, chairman of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC), during his recent meeting with members of the Delegation of Disciplined Services of the Hong Kong SAR government caused heated discussions here in Hong Kong. Many people offered different interpretations of Zhang's speech, but the most important part of it is clearly the central government's support for the Hong Kong SAR.
      
        First, the central authorities support Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying. Zhang praised Leung and his administrative team's performance in running the SAR government and reaffirmed the central government fully approves Leung's work and supports him resolutely. His words are so straightforward there is absolutely no reason for anyone to believe rumors about "Plan B" and whatnot. As for those who routinely spread such rumors, Zhang practically told them their attempts to "overthrow" with lies are a waste of everything.
        
          Second, the central government supports the rule of law in Hong Kong. Without mincing a word, Zhang reminded Hong Kong residents the SAR needs the rule of law to ensure social harmony and stability to conduct constitutional reform and advance democracy. It may sound too generalized but is in fact very specific. As the next phase of Hong Kong's constitutional reform approaches some ideas angling for a different route have emerged. Some people have gone so far as to urge members of the public to make the central authorities satisfy their demand with what they call civil disobedience. All this has clearly breeched the bottom of the rule of law. Zhang's reminder is an unmistakable warning to those troublemakers their attempts to challenge the rule of law will not be tolerated.
          
            Interestingly, Zhang never mentioned "Occupy Central" in his speech but Tai Yiu-ting, who co-wrote the de facto manifesto of the planned illegal movement, was convinced those words are aimed at his pet project. As a leading creator and advocate of "Occupy", he has a very good reason to feel targeted, because the planned illegal campaign is a curse on Hong Kong by destroying the rule of law. This has been established beyond a shadow of doubt and Zhang Xiaoming, director of the Liaison Office of the Central People's Government in the Hong Kong SAR, also pointed it out in his speech to members of the Legislative Council earlier this year. It is hoped that Tai and his allies would understand the NPCSC chairman's words and abandon their plan to jeopardize Hong Kong's rule of law.
            
              Third, the central authorities support the Hong Kong Police Force. Zhang made it clear the central government recognizes and appreciates the remarkable contributions the disciplined services have made to protecting the smooth implementation of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle and the Basic Law in Hong Kong and to maintaining the rule of law and social stability, as well as directly serving local residents. He also said he hopes the disciplined services will go from strength to strength in playing their law-enforcement role in support of the SAR government's lawful administration and protecting Hong Kong's rule of law for the sake of its prosperity and stability.
              
                As NPCSC chairman and one of highest central government leaders, Zhang will never fire random shots, so to speak. His speech was firmly locked on topics that the central government and Hong Kong society are very concerned about. It is in response to some of the confusion circulating in Hong Kong and meant to clear it up in a no-nonsense fashion. Anyone capable of reading the current situation in Hong Kong objectively should have no difficulty understanding Zhang's comments.
                
                  The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                  
(HK Edition 09/10/2013 page1)

