


      Professor Tai Yiu-ting, who screamed "Occupy Central with Love and Peace", has all of a sudden thrown out a new idea. In a recent article under the headline "Hongkongers have paid too little for democracy" in a local newspaper, he quoted a friend in Taiwan as saying, "Hongkongers have indeed paid too little for democracy, be it spending time behind bars or bleeding (forget about how long in jail or how much bloodshed), the fact is Hongkongers never did anything that cost them their personal freedom for a long time, let alone their lives."
      
        By the sound of it Tai could be telling Hong Kong residents to throw themselves in prison or shed blood for democracy. So they may lose personal freedom for a long time or even their lives. Big deal, right? Now Prof Tai has turned from a democracy fighter to a revolutionary hero. Even without the Che Guevara T-shirt he is way more radical than "Long Hair" Leung Kwok-hung has ever been. If the slogan of "Occupy Central with Love and Peace" he advertised early on sounded like civil disobedience somehow, the "too little bloodshed" theory today defines "color revolution" perfectly.
        
          "Color revolution" is political turmoil orchestrated by the US as part of its global strategy, which saw the Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania break away from the Soviet Union in 1991, later on the "Orange Revolution" in Ukraine and "Rose Revolution" in Georgia, the "Arab Spring" that began in Tunisia in 2010 and the chaos in Syria today. Its destructiveness has been on full display in all these political disasters, which subverted governments and caused widespread bloodshed everywhere.
          
            "Color revolution", as its name suggests, has nothing to do with democracy. It is violent revolution in democratic disguise. For example, what happened in Egypt in recent years was hailed by Western media as the epitome of "color revolution" until widespread bloodshed and loss of human lives showed Egyptian people how costly it was. When Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi, who was elected by universal suffrage, was thrown out of office, his supporters held mass demonstrations in several major cities in protest and clashed with police and the armed forces as well as Morsi's opponents. The resulting bloodshed and loss of human lives have left the country in unprecedented crisis. I wonder if Prof Tai thinks the Egyptian people have paid too little or too much for democracy.
            
              A purpose of democratic election is to avoid bloodshed. By advocating bloodshed Tai has betrayed democratic principles. The truth is Tai knows very well "Occupy Central" cannot avoid bloodshed while "love and peace" is just bait to lure people into a trap.
              
                Everyone should realize that, by conspiring with foreign forces and advocating "imprisonment and bloodshed for democracy", Tai has gone far beyond freedom of speech. He has not only betrayed Hong Kong residents' interest but also set himself up to pay a heavy price for it.
                
                  The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                  
(HK Edition 10/09/2013 page9)

