 
Does Hong Kong have no other way of instituting political reform and achieving democracy than by resorting to the confrontational approach of "Occupy Central"? 
"Occupy Central" would give a clear message to authorities in Hong Kong and Beijing of strong demand for an Anglo-Saxon style of popular election to be held in Hong Kong in 2017 and 2020, as promised by the central government. 
But, there are some basic points we should consider first. 



The scale of mass participation in "Occupy Central" needs to be very large, not in the range of 10,000 as suggested by its proponents, but instead it should reach several hundreds of thousands to convince the authorities and general populace in Hong Kong that it is not a minority group movement, and not a political hijack of the polity and society by a small fraction of the local population. 
The event must be peaceful, with minimal disruption to the social and economic order of Hong Kong. This might contradict the first point, as it would be difficult to control the masses if the scale is in such magnitude. But Hong Kong did stage a peaceful mass demonstration in 2003. What has changed is the recent radicalization of local politics and increased polarization among political groups, which might increase the chances of the demonstration getting out of hand. The purpose of the event is to stall the normal business activities in Central, the central business district - symbolically the heart of the city - which would run into conflict with the authorities who would like to protect local business interests and maintain order in the district. It is by nature different from mass demonstration, which evokes a gesture of discontent by protesting in the streets. "Occupy Central" is by nature confrontational; it intends to disrupt activities in Central, pose a threat to government and exert pressure for acceptance of political demands. 
The occupation means taking over Central for more than an evening. As a result, disruption to normal activities in the district would be great and the authorities would be obliged to clear any staged sit-ins. Although proponents say they would give up and let the police arrest them as a consequence, it might turn messy and scenes of arrest could be ugly. The political and social cost would be larger than anticipated by the movement's proponents. Hong Kong's image would be tarnished around the world, jeopardizing tourism and business. More importantly, if the arrests provoke violence, both sides would be blamed. The resulting hostility would last long, hampering the political reform process and other policy controversies. Potentially there could be further confrontations, long periods of unrest and distrust in local politics, unless the government takes decisive action to rule out confrontational activities. The damage would run deep. This is something that any people who care for Hong Kong would not like to see, but appears unavoidable if the movement attracts a significant number of participants. 



Even if the movement succeeds in forcing the SAR government to accept the demands of its proponents, the central government would still need to be convinced. Suppose the situation worsened so much that the central government gave in, the political situation in Hong Kong would not be improved. The SAR government would be crippled and every policy measure would face uncompromising opposition from the winners of the "Occupy Central" movement, which would grow in number and strength, attracting all political forces, as well as creating new political groups which would benefit from disagreement between the central government and the SAR government. Hong Kong would become ungovernable even before the popular elections are held in 2017 and 2020. 
Popular elections do not solve all political, social and economic issues. If it were so, all countries with democratic institutions and popular elections would not have crises. In fact, some developing countries with popular elections are still deep in trouble and their people suffering. Even advanced nations with hundreds of years of popular elections still face huge structural and cyclical problems, which threaten to destabilize their societies and polities. At issue is not just whether there are popular elections, but how the institutional and cultural systems are able to cope with ever-changing scenarios coming from both within and without. This is a systemic problem as the society has every one of its institutions interconnected through the agency of flesh and blood of human beings. 
Popular elections and other democratic practices are just instruments to solve certain problems, and themselves create new problems that await new instruments to resolve them. The problem-solving process is never-ending and there are no quick fixes and one-for-all solutions. Philosophically there is no utopia, especially when we read the classic Animal Farm by George Orwell. This applies to communism as well as to free-market capitalism ruled by the "big brothers". The proponents of "Occupy Central" should not be so naive to believe blindly in popular elections even before they are able to define the technical specificities of the type of popular elections they prefer. If they are not simple and naive, and are well acquainted with the experiences of popular democracies in the world, then what is the intention behind "Occupy Central"? Is it simply for the better development of Hong Kong? 
The author is head of China Business Center, Hong Kong Polytechnic University. 

(HK Edition 03/20/2013 page1)

