 
There are many things about Hong Kong and the mainland that I am not happy about. But there are also many things about the United States, the European Union, the United Kingdom, and the world that I am not happy about. It is good to see intellectuals and particularly academics - colleagues in various institutions of higher learning in Hong Kong - put up an act together trying to make the world a better place for all. However, the so-called "Occupy Central" campaign will not help accomplish the task one bit. 
Those who come up with the "Occupy Central" idea believe that the 2017 election for the Chief Executive should be completely free of any hurdles and screening and that any attempt to exclude undesirable characters in the race for the next Chief Executive of Hong Kong is unacceptable. But they need to understand why the central government cannot accept some people as candidates, and they need to understand that a strategy of confrontation will not work. 



Some people in Hong Kong are skeptical about the mainland political system. Some believe that one-party rule is necessarily corrupt, and that transition to multi-party politics is not only an improvement, but constitutes the very essence of true democracy. They believe that one-party rule cannot be democratic. But this belief must not be held without critical analysis. Where is the evidence that multi-party rule is always superior to one-party rule? Russia, India, Mexico, Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines, for instance, are all countries based on multi-party competition. But corruption is worse in all these countries than on the mainland according to Transparency International. China ranks 80, India 94, Mexico 105 and Russia ranks 133, according to the organization's 2012 report. Moreover, according to the 2013 World Justice Project Report, China also ranks above India, Mexico and Russia, although somewhat lower than its other Asian neighbors mentioned above. 
Establishing a multi-party system is actually bad for the country. It is far better and far more important to establish proper public governance mechanisms, such as independence of the judiciary and a free press, than to establish a multi-party system. It is far more important to ensure that the ruling party is led by majority, than to have many parties when each party is undemocratic and lacks proper governance. Proper public governance is much easier to achieve when all the eyes are set on a single party. A ruling party is a public asset, or gongqi in Chinese, and it should belong to all the people. Having several parties competing for power inevitably will lead to partisan politics. We have seen how partisan politics threatens the national interest - the near collapse of the US government during the "fiscal cliff" crisis being a case in point. 
So, any attempt to introduce multi-party politics is not in the interest of the country or the Chinese people. Because the parties do not belong to anyone in particular, and Beijing's objection to adopt multi-party politics is not based on anyone's selfish motives, but is based on the nation's interests. Having a Chief Executive who tries to bring multi-party politics to the country will certainly jeopardize Hong Kong's interests too, because confrontation is adverse to the interests of the HKSAR and the mainland. 
For this reason, requiring that the next Chief Executive must espouse the nation's current political system is in the interests of Hong Kong and the nation as a whole. This is notwithstanding the fact that there is still much room for combating corruption and improving the rule of law in the country. Indeed, Beijing recognizes there is a lot of work to be done. The latest white paper on judicial reform issued last year is a milestone and testifies to the commitment of Chinese leaders to ensure that no one is above the law. Recently, there have been calls for exposing the assets of top officials and holding them more accountable to the people from within the Party itself. 
Of course, anyone who has the long-term interests of Hong Kong and the mainland at heart should be eligible to run for the city's top post, and this is indeed what is meant by "ai guo, ai gang"(Love the Country, Love Hong Kong). But confrontational tactics either demonstrate a lack of such love, or a lack of the wisdom to turn this love into a blessing for the country and for Hong Kong. What is needed is intelligent and open-minded dialogue, and that requires a willingness to give up confrontational tactics altogether. 
The author is director of the Center for Public Policy Studies, Lingnan University. 

(HK Edition 03/12/2013 page1)

