
Despite challenges, China's achievements in the legal, economic, social and political fields speak louder than words
China underwent its second Universal Periodic Review at the United Nations Human Rights Council on Tuesday.
During the session, China stated its position on protecting human rights and outlined its new achievements, challenges and future goals, with emphasis on the implementation of the recommendations it accepted at the first UPR four years ago. An overwhelming majority of countries commended China's significant progress in protecting human rights. The efforts by the country and its people to promote and protect human rights were fully recognized by the international community.


The Sixth Beijing Forum on Human Rights was held in Beijing on Sept 12-13, 2013. [Photo / Xinhua]
The promotion and protection of human rights is a journey of a thousand miles and we have to begin with a single step.
Four years ago, the Chinese government made a solemn commitment at the first UPR: "When China undergoes the next review, the world will see a China with a more prosperous economy, improved democracy and the rule of law, a more harmonious society and people living in greater happiness."
Now the commitment has been basically fulfilled by every step China has taken to advance the cause of human rights in recent years.
A single step could be as big as the abolishment of the death penalty for 13 separate nonviolent economic crimes, and as small as the direct election of villagers' committees in rural areas. It could be a long-term policy such as building a social security system covering urban and rural residents, or a one-off program like the 4 trillion yuan ($645 billion) economic stimulus package that has boosted the economy and created jobs. It could be a holistic plan like the National Human Rights Action Plan of China (2012-15) which is based on the experience of the fully-implemented National Plan 2009-10, and could also be a concrete action as an open and constructive dialogue on the issue of human rights with another country. All these steps lead to a giant leap in the protection of human rights in China.
A small number of Western countries tend to lash out at China's human rights out of an ideological bias and based on unfounded information. But facts and figures speak louder than words. The following gives a vivid picture of China's protection of economic, social and cultural rights, civil and political rights as well as the rights of special groups.
