


      After years of following a Western model of development, continent can learn from china
      
        Africa is disenfranchised both politically and economically, leading to the deceleration of development, prosperity and unity on the continent. Poverty levels are increasing day by day, with ethnic conflicts being the order of the day in most African countries. With the perceived failure of the Western model of democracy, which was imposed on many African countries after they gained independence, the continent is now looking East as an alternative.
        
          Ironically, per capita income in most African countries in the 1970s, such as Kenya a few years after its independence, was higher than in most countries in East Asia such as Singapore, South Korea and Malaysia. Then the situation was different and comparisons can't be made. Africa is now regressing in terms of development and political stability, while countries such as China, Indonesia, Malaysia and South Korea are progressing steadily.
          
            But after many African countries gained independence, the continent began to deteriorate as a result of bad governance and a misinterpretation of democracy and its ideals among African leaders and their international masters. The economic situation today in most African countries is worse compared with their colonial days and is deteriorating day by day.
            
              According to observers and researchers, the Western model of democracy has failed to create an impact in Africa and to some extent is a contributor to its woes today. They say the Western model has created divisions and turmoil. But this in turn has allowed African people, especially their leaders, to start looking for new friends and partners in East and Southeast Asia. Even though this trend of looking East is worrying partners, allies and friends in the West, Africa is determined to establish friendships with China and other Asian countries.
              
                China, like other countries in Asia, have developed remarkably and steadily. A few have become world powers, both economically and politically, attracting both admiration and envy from the international community.
                
                  China has become a new and promising friend and partner of Africa. Most African countries enjoy strong bilateral ties with the country. China's economic support, in the form of grants and loans, has been extended to Africa to facilitate trade and infrastructure development. Trade between China and Africa has exceeded $200 billion last year despite a worrying trade imbalance.
                  
                    China has extended an arm of friendship and cooperation to Africa based on common interests. Besides bilateral relations, China is also opening communications through non-governmental organizations to promote people-to-people cooperation.
                    
                      Grassroots networks provide excellent opportunities for people to socialize and exchange ideas.
                      
                        Through exchange programs, the Chinese government has been providing opportunities to African scholars, opinion leaders, professionals, journalists and investors to visit China to exchange ideas and information.
                        
                          Besides sharing historical and cultural experiences, China has made tremendous strides in providing infrastructure, information technology and industrial development help to the continent. It has also nurtured and cultivated its system of values to the admiration of Africa and the rest of the world. On the other hand, Africa is a rich continent in terms of natural resources, minerals and human capital.
                          
                            It is unfair to argue that China is only interested in Africa because of its natural resources. Africa also needs China for its development and prosperity. China has been instrumental in building roads, highways and railway lines in African countries such as Sudan, Zambia and Kenya. China built the Tazara Railway in Tanzania. Recently, China completed a massive highway in Kenya (Thika Road) that has not only opened transport in the country but has also greatly relieved traffic congestion.
                            
                              Naturally, it is up to Africa's leaders to explore and take advantage of opportunities existing in the China-Africa relationship. Africa can learn from China's experience in many ways. The relationship should not be a one-way road. It should be a benefit to all in order to create opportunities and a win-win situation.
                              
                                One major hurdle is the language barrier between Africa and China. Most Chinese do not speak English or French and yet both English and French are the national languages of most African nations. The effort by the Confucius Institutes in Africa to create opportunities for Africans and Chinese to learn from each other is laudable.
                                
                                  The author is executive director of the Institute for Democracy and Leadership in Africa. The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
                                  
(China Daily 02/22/2013 page8)

