 
Li Fei, deputy secretary-general of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) cum chairman of the HKSAR Basic Law Committee (BLC) under the NPCSC, accompanied by BLC vice-chairman Zhang Rongshun, visited Hong Kong from Nov 21 to 23. The visit came ahead of next month's scheduled launch of public consultations on political reform, and the two senior Beijing officials are in charge of issues related to the Basic Law. The steps they have taken in the city will be regarded as mirroring those of the central authorities in paving the way for the HKSAR's constitutional development towards universal suffrage. 
On Nov 22, when Li met officials and lawmakers at a Government House luncheon, he said the Chief Executive (CE) election by universal suffrage should resolve a dilemma: Under the Basic Law, the HKSAR can neither elect a CE opposed to the central government nor legally forbid a qualified person to run for the city's top office. 
Article 44 of the Basic Law stipulates: "The Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall be a Chinese citizen of not less than 40 years of age who is a permanent resident of the Region with no right of abode in any foreign country and has ordinarily resided in Hong Kong for a continuous period of not less than 20 years." Under this stipulation, some of those in the opposition camp are qualified to run for Chief Executive. 
Nevertheless, if such a candidate is elected CE through one-person, one-vote, Article 43 of the Basic Law - which states that "the Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall be accountable to the Central People's Government and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region in accordance with the provisions of this law" - will most probably be violated. Any person who aims to topple the central government definitely will not obey instructions from Beijing or be accountable to the central government. If this happens, the relationship between the SAR and the mainland will be seriously damaged and the city will be in great trouble. 



Such a dilemma, like the proverbial "Catch-22", is a fundamental paradox in the city's political reality since the days of British colonial rule. In 1984, London introduced a democratic reform of some sort in Hong Kong, a clever play before the handover of Hong Kong's sovereign rule back to China. Since then, the handover has been perceived by many as being at odds with the kind of democratic reform prescribed by Western powers. So much so it's quite possible that a representative of the opposition camp will become a CE election candidate and even stand a chance of winning by universal suffrage, unless an effective mechanism is available to resolve the dilemma. 
The inherent contradiction between Articles 43 and 44 of the Basic Law demonstrates a unique characteristic of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle. In other words, the HKSAR's constitutional development toward universal suffrage is unique in the world. 
However, many Hongkongers don't understand it. They have been sold on the Western political model. And the opposition camp here has been milking Western encouragement to its own benefit. Their plot is to duplicate the Western political model in Hong Kong initially, and westernize the nation's political system. 
Coincidentally, on Nov 20, just a day before the visit of the two Beijing BLC officials, the US-China Economic and Security Review Commission released its 2013 annual report to the US Congress, saying: "Beijing does not intend to allow real democracy to develop in Hong Kong." Needless to explain, by "real democracy," it means the Western model. The US is repeatedly pressing Hong Kong to duplicate the Western political model, but it's losing energy in trying to realize its wish. 
The world order is irresistibly changing. On Nov 18, John Kerry, US Secretary of State, publicly announced that the era of the Monroe Doctrine, which dominated the US policy in the Americas for two centuries, is over. He said, since now, the relationship "is not about a United States declaration about how and when it will intervene in the affairs of other American states. It's about all of our countries viewing one another as equals sharing responsibilities, cooperation on security issues, and adhering not to doctrine, but to the decisions that we make as partners to advance the values and the interests that we share". 
We urge the US to change its policy in Asia. But, first of all, we Hong Kong people should comprehend that it's a blind alley to introduce the Western political model in Hong Kong. Universal suffrage is an unprecedented mission for the city - it's under Hong Kong people's own shoulders and relying on our wisdom and courage to succeed. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 11/27/2013 page9)

