
The annual session of the National People's Congress concluded on Sunday, with Xi Jinping, China's newly elected president, pledging to advance the cause of socialism with Chinese characteristics and strive to realize the dream of the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. The Chinese dream represents the will of all Chinese people, whose persistent effort will be needed to realize it, says an article in People's Daily. Excerpts: 
The First Session of the 12th NPC holds the key to China's development. Deputies to the NPC have fulfilled their constitutional and legal obligations by deciding on major principles and policies, and by passing resolutions in conformity with the will of the people. 
The NPC annual session summarized the achievements and experiences China has gained over the past five years and highlighted the new national priorities after reviewing and adopting a number of important documents, including the Government Work Report, and central and local budgets. China's newly elected State leaders provide the organizational guarantee for furthering reform and opening-up and establishing socialism with Chinese characteristics in the country. 
Before that, the 11th NPC Standing Committee exercised its legislative rights, power to appoint and remove officials, and the right to supervise government work and take decisions on major national issues. The First Session of the 12th NPC was united, pragmatic and progressive in its functions, carrying forward the cause pioneered by the previous congress. The 12th NPC has vowed to forge ahead and, most importantly, rally people under the new leadership and inspire them to continue to help build a well-off society in an all-round way and realize the dream of the Chinese nation's rejuvenation. 
Just as President Xi said, the Chinese dream is a dream of national strength, prosperity and people's happiness. To realize the dream, China must take the road of socialism with Chinese characteristics. The country must also foster the Chinese spirit, in which patriotism and the spirit of reform and innovation play a core role, and unite 1.3 billion people of all ethnicities into a great source of strength. 
But the dream cannot be realized without the rule of law. One of the most important experiences the country has had since the founding of New China is reflected in a statement of Deng Xiaoping, which was quoted by newly elected top legislator Zhang Dejiang during the NPC session. It says that democracy should be safeguarded by the rule of law, institutionalized and legalized, and that China needs to ensure that the law does not change because of leadership transition or differences in personal opinions and focus of the leaders. 
Therefore, to realize the dream of national rejuvenation, China should continue to perfect the socialist legal system with Chinese characteristics, which will lay a solid foundation for deepening reform and building a well-off society in an all-round way. It should also ensure that power is not free of supervision and restraint. Besides, it has to improve the people's congress system and give full play to the functions of people's congresses and their standing committees at various levels. 
The Chinese dream is the dream of the people. It means that all Chinese people deserve equal opportunities to enjoy a prosperous life, see their dreams come true and benefit from the country's development. It is a dream of the entire nation as well as of every individual, and it cannot be realized without the arduous efforts of all Chinese people. 
(China Daily 03/21/2013 page9)
