 
Hugo Swire, minister of state at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the British government, published an article in Hong Kong newspapers expressing the UK's readiness to support Hong Kong's progress toward universal suffrage however it can. It was a public display of Britain's interest in meddling with Hong Kong's internal affairs. To those familiar with Britain's colonial history this is not surprising at all. It is well-known around the world that the UK never failed to make a mess of every colony before it had to let go; and it has interfered in the internal affairs of many a former colony one way or another since its colonial rule ended. Eating its own words has never been a problem for London when it comes to finding excuses for playing the devil. A ready example can be found in what the British government did before and after the signing of the Sino-British Joint Declaration on the issue of Hong Kong. 
Back in the 1980s, after Britain defeated Argentina and retook the Malvinas (Falkland) Islands, then Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher asked the armed forces more than once if they had what it took to ensure British rule over Hong Kong beyond 1997. She was apparently not satisfied when the military told her Hong Kong was not the "Falklands" and China was not Argentina. So much so she later suggested to Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping that the three unfair treaties that turned Hong Kong into a British colony would remain effective beyond 1997 and Britain would hand over the city's sovereignty to China but continue running the local government. The British side only signed the Joint Declaration more or less according to the principles and stand of the Chinese side after Deng bluntly rejected Thatcher's idea and the Chinese government convinced the British side there was no other way around. 



After the disintegration of the Soviet Union and radical changes in Eastern Europe in the 1990s, however, the UK government felt the Chinese government would not last much longer and it was time to plan for overturning the Joint Declaration. Declassified documents show the Foreign Affairs Committee of the UK Parliament suggested back then that it was unclear whether the Chinese government headed by Deng could stay in power until 1997 and the British government should adjust its China (including Hong Kong) policies accordingly. It seems they believed Britain had made too many concessions to China in the Joint Declaration over the issue of Hong Kong and it was time to overturn it and let the Chinese eat humble pie for a change. 
The late Sir Percy Cradock wrote a book about his experience in and reflection on negotiating the Sino-British Joint Declaration that, although the Joint Declaration was so successful, many in the UK felt only unease and guilt. They admitted the reason for reaching agreement with China was flawless but kept asking the logic-defying question: could we have found another solution? In June 1989, news media completely ignored the necessity of the Joint Declaration and Sino-British cooperation. Instead they buried themselves in lamentation and imagined things would have been more to our advantage if we had been more assertive. Such musing gave rise to accusations like "betraying 6 million Hongkongers", "surrender", "indulgence and appeasement" and whatnot. And during the Commonwealth summit held in Kuala Lumpur that year Thatcher called on member states of the Commonwealth to interfere in Hong Kong affairs. 
On the same day the National People's Congress approved the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China in 1990, the British side ignored China's objection and warning and presented, through the Legislative Council (LegCo) of Hong Kong, the British Nationality (Hong Kong) Act 1990 to the House of Commons for deliberation, in breach of the mutual understanding on such matters between China and Britain. The law would not only turn more than 220,000 Hong Kong residents of Chinese descent into "British nationals", but also identify potential "beneficiaries" of the British Nationality (Hong Kong) Act 1990 for "important positions" in the future, with quotas reserved for "those who hold crucial positions" in Hong Kong in the countdown to 1997. 
A few months after the Basic Law was approved and promulgated the British side, in total disregard of China's objection and warning against it, officially introduced the Hong Kong Bill of Rights. Although the UK government signed the two international conventions on human rights back in 1976 it never introduced a bill of rights in Britain or Hong Kong until 1990. In its report to the United Nations Human Rights Commission on human rights conditions in Britain and dominions including Hong Kong in 1978, the British government maintained that every British citizen could find provisions in existing laws on protection of individual rights, which is why there was no need to write the two international conventions into British law; Britain's legal system operates on the understanding that it complies with the human rights conventions; and Britain fulfills its obligations as prescribed in the human rights conventions through existing laws. 



Up until 1986 the British side said in a document on constitutional continuation after 1997 presented to China, that it was against the proposal to include one of the human rights conventions in the Basic Law. Later, however, the British side abandoned this stance and formally introduced the Hong Kong Bill of Rights, which takes precedence over other existing laws when the latter is in conflict with it, technically putting it above Hong Kong's Basic Law. 
When Chris Patten took office as the last British governor in Hong Kong in 1992, he gave a "somber account of the situation" in Hong Kong to his charges within the colonial administration, swearing the Chinese government would collapse like its Soviet and Eastern European counterparts did before 1997, and urging principal officials and civil servants alike to make the most out of their "poor hand" by taking his lead in breaking away from all agreements and understanding between China and Britain in a bid to gain whatever Britain could not from negotiations with China 10 years earlier. With full support from the British government, Patten took the most daring gamble of his political career and put on a show of "sudden democracy" in violation of the Joint Declaration, the Basic Law of Hong Kong and understanding between the two governments on Hong Kong's constitutional development despite strong objection from the Chinese government. 
From 1994 on, the UK government also carried out a series of policies in Hong Kong to maintain as much influence as possible in the city after the handover, like it did before ending its colonial rule in all other former colonies, by increasing its interests in Hong Kong and attempting to create as many difficulties and troubles as it could for the Hong Kong SAR government, or China for that matter. For example, it tried to undercut the SAR government's administrative power by amending certain laws. In the 1992 amendment of the Societies Ordinance, for instance, the provisions banning local societies from establishing contacts with political groups outside Hong Kong and banning non-local political organizations from opening representative offices in Hong Kong were removed; it also replaced the existing registration system with a "notification" system. In April 1994 it amended the Public Security Ordinance to allow public assembly without license but a prior notice to relevant authorities only. 
On May 11, 1996 Patten declared in North America that Britain would continue to worry over Hong Kong affairs for 50 years after 1997 and the Chinese would be hugely mistaken if they failed to understand it. He added that no one should assume Britain would "wash its hands" of Hong Kong affairs at the stroke of midnight on June 30, 1997 and leave Hong Kong to its own fate. 
Apparently some of those anti-China forces still refuse to "wash their hands" of Hong Kong affairs. So what? We have long been prepared for their attempts to mess up Hong Kong. Here's to you, Sir Hugo Swire: Do you really believe your article can turn Hong Kong upside down? In your dreams! 
The author is director of the publicity, culture and sports department at the Liaison Office of the Central People's Government in the Hong Kong SAR. 

(HK Edition 09/25/2013 page9)

