 'Occupy Central" initiator Chu Yiu-ming, Alliance for True Democracy convener Joseph Cheng Yu-shek, and Labour Party Chairman Lee Cheuk-yan recently held an "Occupy" press conference in Taipei in collusion with the former Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) chairman Shih Ming-te, to announce a roundtable meeting between Hong Kong opposition politicians and Taiwanese political activists would be organized in early December. They also said Shih would appeal to Taiwan's public to sign covenants in support of the "Occupy" campaign. More appalling was Shih's intention to send 17 Taiwanese activists to Hong Kong each month to play the martyrs in the campaign. 
One thing that emerges strongly from any study of the "Occupy" group's association with Taiwanese secessionists is their scant regard for veracity and, above all, democracy. Anxious to promote their campaign in the name of "civil disobedience", they have little patience with objective facts that get in the way of their arguments. Facts woefully get brushed aside, doctored, reversed or even suppressed. A case in point is the defense of their association with Taiwanese pro-independence figures.
In the last week, the "Occupy" trio has been severely censured for its collusion with Shih and Taiwanese secessionists. Faced with such accusations, Joseph Cheng last Saturday was belligerent in his rebuttal: "Critics are so hypocritical as to badmouth us. Like us, the pro-Beijing party, Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong (DAB), once met Tsai Ing-wen, former DPP chairperson. Similarly, the publicity department of the central government once met the pro-independence mayor Chen Chu. Did the DAB and the central government also collude with the Taiwanese pro-independence politicians, approving of their secessionist stances?" 
Sadly, Cheng not only twisted, but also suppressed the facts about the controversy. Admittedly, meeting pro-independence figures is no big deal. But, what Cheng sought to brush aside and even conceal was "Occupy" initiators' efforts to reach a consensus with Shih on the "Occupy" movement. Cheng should bear in mind that neither the central government nor DAB once built any consensus with Taiwanese politicians on mainland or Hong Kong affairs. In other words, it was not mainland Chinese officials or DAB members, but Cheng himself and other "Occupy" initiators who invited Taiwanese secessionists to meddle in Hong Kong affairs. 
In addition to veracity, the trio also disregarded democracy. So undemocratic and opaque is the manner in which they planned to collaborate with Shih to launch their "campaign for democracy" that even some local opposition politicians can hardly be on their side. According to a media report, on Oct 16, the Alliance for True Democracy called a special meeting to discuss the plan to meet Shih in Taipei. After heated discussion, most Alliance members vetoed the trip to Taipei. Still, Joseph Cheng, as the convener of the Alliance, travelled to meet Shih in defiance of the veto. Neither did Chu Yiu-ming secure any mandate to meet and collaborate with Taiwanese politicians. The proposal to meet Shih and secure his support for the movement was never tabled for discussion during deliberation days. Most of the deliberators had been kept in the dark about Chu's trip to Taipei. The leadership of the "Occupy" campaign has been marked by the oligarchic power of a handful of political figures. It is no wonder that opposition lawmaker Ronny Tong Ka-wah who, as a member of Alliance for True Democracy, had disapproved of Cheng's trip to Taipei, recently lamented the stifling political climate in the opposition camp. 

If Cheng is a Hong Kong intellectual who tampers with facts in the interests of his warped notions of democracy, Shih is a politician to whom hogwash comes naturally. During the press conference with the "Occupy" trio, Shih said: "Up to now, the Hong Kong Chief Executive has yet to be directly elected. Therefore, Hong Kong people have only turned from British colonial subjects into Chinese colonial subjects." 
Shih's contention is nothing but an outrage. He seems to have lost sight of the definition of de-colonization and democracy. He should bear in mind that direct election of the head of the government is not the only benchmark for democracy and, above all, that there is no correlation between de-colonization and the adoption of direct election. Many Asian countries such as Singapore and Pakistan do not directly elect their heads of government after declaring independence from imperial powers. The shame is not that neither the prime minister of Singapore nor Hong Kong Chief Executive is directly elected. The shame is how Shih will undemocratically and peremptorily impose Taiwan's notions of election on Hong Kong people by sending hundreds of Taiwan activists to play in the "Occupy" campaign. 
Nothing appeals to the "Occupy Central" initiators and Taiwan pro-independence politicians more than the feeling they are the only champions of democracy. Nothing is further from the truth. The reality is that, through their complete disregard for veracity, they repeatedly betray the values of the very democracy they claim to represent. 
The author is a lecturer at Hong Kong Polytechnic University and a Yau Tsim Mong district councillor.
(HK Edition 10/31/2013 page1)
 
