


      Legislative Councillor Chan Ka-lok asked Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying a difficult question after the latter delivered his second Policy Address since taking office: "Do you want to be Ceausescu of Romania or Gorbachev of the Soviet Union?"
      
        It is well known that Nicolae Ceausescu was general secretary of the Romanian Workers' Party and head of state. He was overthrown and executed with his wife by a firing squad in 1989; while Mikhail Gorbachev, as leader of the former Soviet Union, tried to reform the country with Western-style democracy, but failed spectacularly as the country fell apart. Apparently Chan Ka-lok was comparing Hong Kong to the Romania of yesteryear and to the former Soviet Union. He was also likening Hong Kong's constitutional reforms to the "color revolution".
        
          If Leung had acknowledged these references he would have fallen into Chan's trap and would have been seen as agreeing with him - one way or the other. But Leung immediately threw the question right back at Chan, without hesitation. He said: "Councillor Chan, your analogy is absolutely absurd."
          
            The fact is there is no comparison between the current social conditions in Hong Kong and the disintegration of the Soviet Union or the political coup d'tat of Romania. "Absolutely absurd" is a simple, but resounding counterblow to Chan's sneaky attempt to discredit the CE. In terms of performance in that round, Chan was not even close to matching Leung.
            
              It is safe to say Chan's question was misguided. It is common knowledge that a string of political upheavals swept across Eastern Europe in the late 1980s and 1990s, beginning in Poland and then spreading to other former Warsaw Pact member states such as the German Democratic Republic (East Germany), Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania and ending with the disintegration of the Soviet Union. Gorbachev's political reforms broke apart the mighty Soviet Union with former member states struggling for years under political turmoil and a subsequent economic slump. The coup d'tat in Romania led to a bloody civil war that cost the nation many lives. By asking Leung whether he wants to be Gorbachev or Ceausescu, was Chan threatening him with violent death if he refuses to allow peaceful transformation and hand over power? This is surely an extreme example of unbridled political ambition and lawlessness.
              
                Chan holds a doctor's degree in law and is considered to be an expert on the "color revolution". He is seen, in private, as a possible future leader of the Civic Party. Even current Chairwoman, Audrey Eu Yuet-mee, has to let him have his way once in a while. It is a shame he cannot live up to other people's expectations because of his poor record in politics and district affairs. This time he failed to gain any benefits by making a snide comment to the CE. He exposed his incompetence and ignorance instead. This time around many people believe his position in the Civic Party is no longer safe and he should switch allegiance to Scholarism, if he is astute enough. Or he may earn some respect by joining the radical group with the dirtiest name in Cantonese?
                
                  The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                  
(HK Edition 01/22/2014 page1)

