 



It has hardly surprised many that Anson Chan and Martin Lee have found their trip to Britain as disappointing as their earlier one to the United States - if not more so. 
The two so-called stalwarts of the opposition camp have expressed their "disappointment" at being left out in the cold by British Prime Minister David Cameron and former foreign secretary William Hague. These two refused to meet Chan and Lee. 
Worse, the pair got slapped in the face. In their latest attempt to rally support for the opposition amid the wrangling over Hong Kong's constitutional reforms, Chan and Lee, during their week-long trip, tried hard to spread their message. They argued that the special administrative region's (SAR) high degree of autonomy has been compromised. 
The British government has clearly rejected this idea. In its latest six-month report on Hong Kong released during the pair's visit, William Hague stated unambiguously that the "One Country, Two Systems" constitutional framework has "continued to work well". 
Since Hong Kong's handover 17 years ago the two political figures have always sought foreign support for the opposition camp they represent. They frequented Washington and London whenever Hong Kong's constitutional development reached a critical stage, hoping that external pressure would help coerce Beijing into making concessions. This time was no exception as the SAR government kick-started the five-step process to achieve universal suffrage in 2017. 
By untiringly seeking foreign intervention, the pair have completely shown their inability to face political reality: Hong Kong is a local administrative region of China, and the nation has never let anyone meddle in its internal affairs. 
The central government has made it unmistakably clear that Hong Kong's constitutional reforms for the election of the Chief Executive in 2017 by way of universal suffrage should be bounded by a legal framework. Any attempt to get foreign pressure to push through an election mechanism without legal standing will prove to be futile. 
History tells there has never been a case wherein the Chinese government submitted to external pressure. The young republic did not yield to Western containment during the Cold War, nor did it during the bitter wrangling with Britain over the handover and future of Hong Kong. 
Chan and Lee's moves to invite foreign intervention in Hong Kong affairs under a political pretense will only undermine the central government's trust in the opposition. It will limit room for dialogue between the two sides to work out a compromise on the election mechanism for the 2017 Chief Executive election. It will also undermine the central government's plan for democratic progress in the HKSAR. 
It is rather amazing that both Chan and Lee appear to have no idea how counterproductive their moves were. Their failure to recognize this reality has left many Hong Kong people, who support democratic advancement, disappointed. 
These two must refrain from doing so again, otherwise their sincerity in helping Hong Kong people achieve universal suffrage and advance democracy will be in serious doubt. 

(HK Edition 07/18/2014 page9)

