



Carl von Clausewitz, the greatest military theorist, once famously concluded that wars never happen because of blind impulses and are always motivated by political goals. That is why, when the cost of war exceeds the value it is likely to generate, people should renounce it and hold talks instead. 
The illegal "Occupy Central" campaign has been continuing for a month now. It is taking a heavy toll on many people's livelihoods as well as Hong Kong's social stability and prosperity. In their first formal dialogue last week the SAR government agreed to present the public's opinions to the the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the State Council and set up a communication platform for all parties to exchange views. The two offers show the government's sincerity in resolving the controversy. They are the biggest concessions the authorities have proposed so far. They are also the best solution - given the rights the SAR government can exercise under the Basic Law. 
As for the Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS), its leaders showed us how good they can be at televized debates. Their presentations were a pleasant surprise. The substance of their arguments, however, was not. In fact, their arguments were a step backward. I still remember HKFS Deputy Secretary-General Shum Ngo-fai talking on live TV after the first scheduled dialogue between the government and HKFS leaders was aborted. Shum said he believed some details of constitutional reform arrangements decided on by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) needed further discussion. However, the HKFS made foolish, unrealistic demands during last week's dialogue. They resurrected a demand buried by its members early on - amending the Basic Law for the opposition's sake by getting rid of the Nominating Committee. As such the HKFS leaders' eloquent speeches in the dialogue were rendered worthless by their inconsistent arguments. 
Amending the Basic Law is a constitutional exercise only the NPC can do. Right now it is absolutely out of the question because Article 159 of the Basic Law stipulates the proposal to amend the Basic Law requires the approval of at least two-thirds of Hong Kong deputies to the NPC and at least two-thirds of the current Legislative Council members as well as the Chief Executive. Without the approval of these representatives and the head of the SAR government such a proposal cannot be formally submitted to the NPC for consideration. The current situation in Hong Kong means the possibility of such a proposal being approved simply does not exist. 
It is also impossible, because the Basic Law took the Drafting Committee and Consultation Committee six years to draft, after China and the UK signed the Joint Declaration in 1984. The drafting process included tremendous amounts of research and deliberation with reference to numerous constitutional documents kept by other countries. No national legislature would ever consider such an amendment just because some students are trying to take the economy hostage. 
The HKFS's demands also lack popular support. The great majority of Hong Kong residents want constitutional reform to advance to the next stage as planned, implementing universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive Election according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC. It does not mean pointless debates over unconstitutional demands to amend the Basic Law just to satisfy a few opposition politicians' lust for power. 
Some of the HKFS members may not realize this but it is the Basic Law that sets the legal age for voting at 18. The last colonial administration before the handover carried out very limited democratic reforms in the 1990s, but it did not allow those younger than 21 to vote. Such were the devious arrangements by the UK government to minimize the possibility of a popular movement championed by college students demanding greater democratic participation. The rationale behind it was that those not old enough to vote usually lack strong motivation to join political movements. 
As for "public nomination", even the "pan-democrats" cannot deny that only those with access to significant funding can afford nomination in a capitalist society. This is why most Western democracies today do not have it. The Basic Law was conceived and drafted when the mainland was still in the early stages of its reforms and liberalization. A lot of the thinking behind the content of the "mini-constitution" then was "people-oriented". 
The public had high hopes for the first talks between the government and the HKFS. People generally hoped for an early end to "Occupy Central" - now on the verge of developing into riots. The idea of abandoning war when the cost has exceeded the projected gain is a very important part of Carl von Clausewitz's legacy. It is best to end a conflict before it causes too much damage. The HKFS should end its illegal occupation now instead of letting it get out of control. The protesting students must realize they do not have the right to casually trample on fellow Hongkongers' basic rights. They should stop before it is too late. 
The author is a veteran journalist based in Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 10/27/2014 page9)

