 



Leaders of the opposition camp have been claiming the moral high ground by trumpeting democracy in Hong Kong. Yet, leaked files detailing millions of dollars in questionable political contributions have left their political reputations in tatters. 
According to recently leaked files, Jimmy Lai, chairman of the Next Media Group, donated over HK$40 million to key politicians and parties in the opposition camp in the past two years. 
Receiving political contributions per se is neither illegal nor immoral. But the secretive behavior involved calls into question the true intentions of these politicians. 
In 2011, Lai, a well-known Beijing-basher who has close ties with Washington, was initially reported to have contributed over HK$50 million to opposition leaders and parties over a period of five years. 
Lai has been evasive about such activities. And the recipients had kept mum in the face of questions from the public and media until evidence of the latest payments was exposed. 
The dubious ways the recipients handled the money, including depositing them in personal bank accounts, also cast doubts on their integrity. 
Lawmakers are required by the Legislative Council's rules of procedure to declare any significant donations they receive within 14 days. But no lawmaker who received contributions from Lai ever made such a declaration. 
Faced with the hard evidence of these payments, members of the opposition reply that Hong Kong has loose political donation laws which allow donors and recipients to avoid disclosing contributions. 
But it is a common knowledge that in countries regarded by these so-called democratic advocates as "models of democracy" that political contributions are subject to strict standards in terms of transparency and other criteria. 
"International standards" have been the mantra of members of the opposition camp whenever they advocate their political ideas. This time round they seem to have made use of a different set of international standards. 
Citizens have the right to ask: How many sets of international standards do the opposition adhere to? 
The latest incident over dubious political contributions is further evidence of the hypocrisy of members of the opposition, to say the least. 
The fact that those who received money from Lai are the same people who have been most vocal in criticizing the central government and those who have been pioneering the "Occupy Central" campaign is indeed revealing. 

(HK Edition 07/24/2014 page9)

