 



In an exclusive interview with China Daily, Professor Lau Siu-kai, vice-president of Chinese Association of Hong Kong and Macao Studies, urged the opposition to accept the SAR government's political reform package. Lau said this was for the best interests of Hong Kong society. 
Seventeen years after the handover, considerable progress has been made on all fronts in the HKSAR. However, due to recent rows over how to attain universal suffrage in 2017, the city has suffered its biggest political crisis since 1997. As a result, the practice of "One Country, Two Systems" faces new challenges. 
The crux of these largely stem from confused, one-sided and even ideologically biased views on "One Country, Two Systems" and the Basic Law. In other words, the continued practice of "One Country, Two Systems" requires Hong Kong people to fully understand the Basic Law. Because Hong Kong is an administrative region of China, universal suffrage - which is closely related to the nation's sovereignty and security - is not something the city can decide on its own. 
Hong Kong has made impressive and steady progress in its democratic endeavors. Before the handover, the Britain handpicked governors for more than 150 years. They never bothered with "democratic elements" and Hong Kong people never had any say in political matters. Since 1997, the central government has consistently promoted Hong Kong's democratic political system. The government and legislature have been composed of local residents. The Chief Executive (CE) is appointed by the central government on the basis of the results of elections. More encouragingly, the timetable has been set - for election of the CE by universal suffrage in 2017. 
It is believed that, based on public opinion gauged during a five-month public consultation period, the SAR government can put forward an electoral package in line with the Basic Law and in the best interests of society. As such, the opposition should put society's well-being ahead of their own. They should heed the public's wishes by accepting the government's package. Otherwise, Hong Kong is likely to remain divided and even risk suffering greater social unrest. 
The year 2017 is just the beginning, rather than the end of democratic endeavors in Hong Kong. The electoral model applied for the first CE election by universal suffrage will not be final. On numerous occasions, the central government has promised to fulfill Hong Kong's aspirations for full democracy. But it has to look at the "actual situation in Hong Kong" and proceed in a gradual and orderly fashion. In view of the current political situation - opinions of the opposition and pro-establishment camps remain poles apart; consensus still remains elusive. The public should therefore accept some compromises for the time being. After all, a firm step towards full democracy is much better than just standing still. 

(HK Edition 08/07/2014 page9)

