



Some people blame the inclusion of liberal studies in the secondary school curriculum for the problems Hong Kong currently faces. Others blame these problems on the excessive political content in liberal studies programs. But all these allegations are irrelevant. The main problem lies in the wrong approach to liberal studies and political issues. Disappointingly, the Hong Kong Professional Teachers' Union (HKPTU), with its great influence, has failed miserably in guiding teachers on how liberal studies should be taught. It has been spreading political propaganda in the name of liberal studies. This cannot continue! 
Ming Pao recently featured two alternative approaches that have been recommended by the HKPTU and the Hong Kong Liberal Studies Association. I have no problem with the one recommended by the latter group. However, the approach offered by Fong King-lok of the HKPTU is disappointing. It starts with his own personal views on "international standards of universal suffrage". Fong then goes on to describe "civil disobedience" as "peaceful, rational, non-violent, and willing to take legal responsibility, aimed at awakening the masses to overturn bad laws". Fong argues that the "students' protests (during the 'Occupy Central' campaign) are to fight for universal suffrage". Regarding the use of force to clear the crowds, Fong said, "Is there a way to prevent the abuse of police power?", "Why can the government oppress the masses?" 
Regarding universal values, Fong referred to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and US Declaration of Independence as aids to educate students concerning democracy. "People have the right and the duty to overthrow dictatorial governments." And "People have the fundamental right to political participation but the government used tear gas many times on the demonstrators," Fong says. 
The material used fails miserably to develop students' minds. It is essentially political propaganda which has no place in liberal education. 
Fong has made several unfounded assumptions. In saying, "Why can the government oppress the masses?" Fong has implied that the government is oppressing the masses. But where is the evidence of this? 
In referring to the use of tear gas, there was no reference to the sequence of events leading to the use of tear gas by police officers. From video footage I saw, there were physical charges against the police which first prompted them to use of pepper spray. This was then followed by the use of tear gas. Fong ignored all this, and painted a picture of police firing tear gas at peaceful, unarmed demonstrators. Fong then asked, "Are there ways to prevent police' abuse of power?" Now, he is assuming the police abused their power. But this has yet to be established. 
Hong Kong allows press freedom and personal freedoms as long as these do not violate the rights and freedoms of others. And where is the oppressive government in Hong Kong which needs to be overturned? Are there any circumstances in this city that resemble any of the circumstances in which respected leaders in the past, like Martin Luther King, Mahatma Gandhi, and Nelson Mandela, launched their civil disobedience movements? Did any of these leaders violate other people's freedoms like the occupiers in Hong Kong do today? 
What is meant by dictatorial? Dictating how people should live their lives - where they can travel and where they cannot - is by definition dictatorial. In this regard, the occupiers are dictatorial. On the other hand, what are the dictatorial actions by the government which is turning people's lives upside down? When the occupiers violate other people's freedoms, why is this not considered dictatorial? Students of liberal studies must be prepared to ask and answer these questions. 
Respecting other people's rights and freedoms is essential to democracy. The rule of law is also vital to democracy. Why are these universal values brushed aside in favor of a particular form of system for nominating candidates for the post of Chief Executive (CE), deemed to be consistent with universal values? 
Liberal education must not be political propaganda. The HKPTU should realize this. But the materials recommended by the union include a lot of political propaganda disguised as liberal education. This is very dangerous, because the HKPTU is poisoning young minds. The essence of political propaganda is that it is politically exclusive: It prevents or excludes alternatives to a particular form of government. 
Liberal education is supposed to encourage critical thinking. But today many students clearly lack the ability to think critically. I see students today who are very articulate when it comes to criticizing other people. But this is not an example of an ability to think critically. Critical thinking should involve humility and the ability to have an open mind. I find these elements sadly lacking in the materials widely disseminated by the HKPTU. 
I believe the HKPTU should be more professional. I see no problem in talking about politics in liberal studies. But students, as well as teachers, must remember that there is much more to democracy than a particular form of nomination system for selecting CE candidates. Therefore, it is important that the HKPTU avoid spreading political propaganda in the name of liberal studies. 
The author is director of the Centre for Public Policy Studies at Lingnan University. 

(HK Edition 11/04/2014 page10)

