 
Editor's Note: This article is Part 3 of a three-part series on "Occupy Central". Part 1 examined "Occupy"s logic for civil disobedience. Part 2 looked into the dangers of violence and causes of youth dissatisfaction with life in Hong Kong. Part 3 below suggests policies to address these causes of conflict and better ways to lobby for reforms. 
The secret to successful real estate investing is location, location and location. Similarly, there are three rules for the successful governance of a highly educated, globalized place such as Hong Kong. 
First rule: Government must communicate continuously and interactively with the people. Second, leaders must both listen and talk to everyone and to specific interest groups. Third, wherever and whenever a government policy is discussed in a public or broadcast forum, a government representative must be present, both to listen and to explain. 
That's communication, communication, communication. 
But in reality, "communication" is actually competition for the hearts and minds of citizens. So the true secret to good governance is competition, competition, and competition for public support. 
That's why political parties in a competitive framework tend to govern best - members know gaining or staying in office takes effective, continuous communication with voters. Governance falters when officials no longer need to worry about losing an election. It faces failing altogether when they don't feel the need to persuade at all. 



Everyone has been condemning Chief Executive (CE) Leung Chun-ying for failing to compete with the pan-democrats for public support. But there are structural reasons why Legislative Council (LegCo) members act the way they do. 
The proportional representation elections for LegCo in only five large districts mean that up to nine legislators will be returned by as little as 11 percent or less of the votes. This means that extremists who only attract one voter in 10, and often many fewer, will get elected. 
They don't have to compromise since they only need to please a fraction of the voters in such large districts. 
The functional constituencies often don't even have contested elections. Many members don't even bother about broader public opinion. All they care about is the handful of voters who voted for them. 
That's why the functional constituency member who chaired the Finance Committee hearings on the new town plans was so inept when handling public opinion. As they say, practice makes perfect, and a lack of practice makes for a real mess of things. 
Requiring a candidate to win a majority of votes in a constituency rather than in a proportional election is a more effective way of reducing extremism. 
Expanding the number of LegCo election districts so that fewer legislators get elected in each district would mean that every candidate would require many more votes to win a seat. 
Raymond Wong feels empowered to assault the Chief Executive in LegCo because he knows he only needs a fraction of votes in a constituency to win a seat. He would never win a majority of votes in a district which relied upon the first past the post election model. 
We cannot get a better "rule by the majority" (democracy) if a minority refuses to accept that the majority do not support confrontation. Estimates for the July 1 protest most reliably put the figure at about 140,000 to 170,000 marchers. That is far less than the 3.5 million registered voters or the 7.2 million residents of Hong Kong. 
All random sample (thus representative) opinion polls demonstrate that the majority are against confrontation. Surveys conducted among marchers at the protest showed that only one in five marchers would be prepared to join "Occupy Central", so a truly insignificant proportion of the minority that the marchers represented, expressed any support for breaking the law. 
"Occupy Central" does not enjoy majority support; hence it is by definition not a "democratic" action. So are there genuinely democratic - majority dependent - ways forward? 
US President Barack Obama recently called on people to vote, as it were, with their money by investing in firms addressing climate change and divesting from firms which were not. 
In effect, this was a call to boycott firms opposing action and support firms taking action. We can do the same regarding firms supporting or opposing reforms meant to ensure greater competition for LegCo or for the CE. 
A boycott and investment/divestment are the quintessential "capitalist" as well as democratic means of driving change. 
Anyone with a smart phone can download an app called "buycott" for example. It uses the universal product code (UPC) and the phone's camera to determine who makes and sells a product. Anyone can start a campaign to boycott a firm which they believe abuses its power or which opposes actions one supports, whether it is climate change or constitutional reform. 
Since Hong Kong is guaranteed a "capitalist" system under "One Country, Two Systems," a boycott or investment/divestment campaign is the most suitable means of communicating one's views and values. 
"Occupy Central" is neither democratic in that a majority support it, nor capitalist, nor is the referendum it held scientifically representative. 
There are better ways to establish what the majority accepts as reasonable steps toward reform. An anonymous, random sample, scientifically constructed opinion poll that lets respondents examine all the options and then respond, for example. Or a boycott that shows strong, voluntary, majority support. 
The author is director of the Masters in Public Administration Program, professor of Government and International Studies and director of Hong Kong Transition Project at the Hong Kong Baptist University. 

(HK Edition 07/10/2014 page9)

