


      The third "Occupy Central Deliberation Day" ("D-Day 3") last week was a watershed event in the debate over the implementation of universal suffrage in Hong Kong. The three winning plans voted for that day in regard to the 2017 Chief Executive election by universal suffrage all advocated "civil nomination". They will no doubt all be rejected by the central government.
      
        The Alliance for True Democracy (ATD), on the brink of falling apart, is now divided into two factions over "civil nomination" - one for, the other, against. In a way, the radical faction hijacked the "D-Day 3" vote by hitching all the pan-democracy parties to their chariot. This surprised the three initiators of the "Occupy Central" movement. It gave people the impression the ATD was losing its place as the dominant force in the opposition camp for building a consensus on universal suffrage. At the same time, the "Occupy Central" campaign lost its moral high ground.
        
          The ATD, founded in March 2013 with a lot of fanfare, could not have anticipated such an abrupt blow - just after its first anniversary. But at least three factors have always been there to cause its demise. One is that the ATD has been suffering from critical differences since its conception and was obviously born prematurely. For example, the Democratic Party (DP) was the first to announce after "D-Day 3" that it had decided to leave the ATD. This surprised few, if any people, given that it had been targeted by radical opposition groups for years. If "D-Day 3" was the "last straw that broke the camel's back", repeated stabs in the back by "fellow" opposition groups in elections over the last two years did most of the damage. The DP had contributed to a breakthrough in constitutional development by meeting then deputy director of the Central People's Government's Liaison Office in the Hong Kong SAR Li Gang in 2010. It had agreed on arrangements for 2012 district council elections. But after this, it was ambushed by other pan-democracy parties at every election. It may never fully recover.
          
            Of course, the infighting among opposition parties was not limited to an exchange of blows between "hawkish" and "dovish" factions. The radical groups have been busy hurting each other just as relentlessly, if not more so. The League of Social Democrats (LSD), for example, showed its true colors after it was founded in 2006 by snatching the microphone away from a Civic Party speaker in a public debate in 2007. This crude behavior was widely booed by critics from all sides. Later the LSD's founding chairman, Wong Yuk-man, took the "no friends in politics" attitude to a new level in 2011. He quit the radical party and immediately founded People Power (PP). In 2013, before the ATD was two months old, he left the PP and became an "independent".
            
              Another factor is the 12-party ATD is a very loose and politically scattered alliance. Its member groups all have their own agendas and moral standards. They cannot even agree on a bottom line for universal suffrage. In terms of political thinking they are as "aligned" as tunas and sharks. Some of the radical parties are so aggressive they will attack anyone. How can other pan-democracy groups feel safe with them?
              
                Within the ATD, there are probably some righteous ones who strive for social justice. But they are constantly threatened by those only motivated by self-interest. Hong Kong is well-known as a free society around the world. But with the absence of strict laws for political parties, anyone can register a political party here. All registered political organizations in Hong Kong are companies or societies approved by the government in accordance with either the Companies Ordinance or the Societies Ordinance. A few people can form a party and a person who acts as its convener can be called "chairman". This allows all kinds of people to form political parties without any established standards. As a result, some pan-democracy parties often remind people of street gangs. Whatever political aspirations they seem to have can be quickly forgotten when someone's own self-interest is at stake; democracy is no exception.
                
                  Still another factor is that the nominal head of the ATD, Joseph Cheng Yu-shek, is a scholar. He does not have the right qualities needed to manage such an impossible bunch of political groups. Some probably still remember that one of the goals of the PP after it was founded was to "terminate" the DP, the Hong Kong Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood (ADPL), Power for Democracy (PD), the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong and the New People's Party. The first three became "allies" of the PP when they joined the ATD. What was Cheng thinking when he embraced them - self-destruction?
                  
                    To be fair, the relatively moderate parties in the pan-democracy camp have long learned to be on guard against ultra-radical groups. The first indication of such misgivings took place in October 2011 when the DP joined the Civic Party, the PD and the Hong Kong Confederation of Trade Unions in an alliance to compete against the PP and radical rivals in district council elections. This was the reason why the PP attacked the DP when DP Chairman Ho Chun-yan attended a public forum the following year. This shocked many supporters in the opposition camp. The two sides found themselves at each other's throats again after "D-Day 3". But no one seems surprised this time.
                    
                      If there is anything positive people can learn from the latest episode of the ATD "soap opera", it is a reminder that democracy cannot work without rules. All parties involved must follow these - despite their differences. They must be prepared to compromise to reach a common goal. Otherwise, society will be left with a form of democracy which will not be satisfactory.
                      
                        The author is a current affairs commentator.
                        
(HK Edition 05/15/2014 page9)

