
The HKSAR Government will soon start new public consultations on the 2017 election of Chief Executive (CE) by universal suffrage. This will certainly focus on elaborating on the details of the decisions made by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) on Aug 31. But it should also clarify three misunderstandings which might obstruct the path to universal suffrage. 
The first of these was criticism that the NPCSC's decision was too conservative. Those holding this opinion espouse the opposition's demand for "genuine universal suffrage" based on so-called international standards rather than the Basic Law. 
However, in Hong Kong the Basic Law is the only guideline and standard for constitutional development. Article 45 of the Basic Law says: "The method for selecting the Chief Executive shall be specified in the light of the actual situation in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and in accordance with the principle of gradual and orderly progress." 
As such the method of "one person, one vote" in the CE election should be specified in the light of the "current" situation in the HKSAR. The formation of the Nominating Committee (NC) should be modeled on the principle of gradual and orderly progress following on from the Election Committee for the fourth CE. Therefore, the NPCSC decision is neither conservative nor radical. It is a fair decision for today's Hong Kong. 



Secondly, there is the belief that the HKSAR should implement universal suffrage according to the NPCSC decision in the 2017 CE election and then improve all the arrangements later. If this idea is simply an attempt to persuade Hongkongers to support the NPCSC decision, then I can live with it. However, one advocate of this idea seems unsatisfied with the NPCSC decision and cannot wait to challenge it. This position sounds similar to the first - as both consider the NPCSC decision to be flawed and worth challenging. 
Tung Chee-hwa, the first CE of the HKSAR, said on Sept 3 that the decision by the NPCSC "is by no means democracy in its final form. If, after 2017, we desire to further improve our democratic system, there is clear mechanism within the Basic Law for us to do so." Tung's comments were consistent with what is stated in Article 45. Once Hong Kong achieves universal suffrage in the 2017 CE election, according to the NPCSC decision, then "the selection of the Chief Executive by universal suffrage upon nomination by a broadly representative Nominating Committee in accordance with democratic procedures," can definitely be achieved. Any "improvements" to methods for selecting the CE by universal suffrage can be made later in light of the "actual situation". This can be done in a gradual, orderly way. 
Thirdly, someone has suggested a slogan to win supporters among the opposition. It says: "Let 5 million eligible voters, instead of an Election Committee (EC) composed of only 1,200 people, elect the CE in 2017." In a sense this sounds right, because it promotes universal suffrage. However, as the NPSCS's decisions said: "If the specific method of universal suffrage for selecting the Chief Executive is not adopted in accordance with legal procedures, the method used for selecting the Chief Executive for the preceding term shall continue to apply." Given the current political situation in Hong Kong, it is likely the 2017 CE election will not be by universal suffrage. Thus, the existing EC will likely fulfill its traditional role in 2017. This will give the opposition an excuse to cause havoc in Hong Kong. 
The political situation in Hong Kong is rapidly deteriorating. 
Opposition lawmakers have said they will boycott the next round of public consultation. They also vowed to veto the government bill based on the NPCSC decision when it reached the Legislative Council (LegCo). The opposition camp also plans to use young people as cannon fodder in its fight against Beijing. The Hong Kong Federation of Students is set to launch a one-week student strike starting from Sept 22. Some secondary school students will boycott classes for one day on Sept 26 following a call from Scholarism. This may well signal the launch of "Occupy Central" - an illegal campaign aimed at paralyzing Central, the city's financial hub. 
The opposition will continue to confront the central government and local authorities. It will organize more "referendums" to express their views on key issues and launch more non-cooperation movements. 
Faced with not only attacks from the opposition but also the growing polarization of society, it is vital for the SAR government to remain rational. It is a daunting task to convince the "silent majority" to support the government. Some of them have been disappointed by the state of the economy and social welfare provisions. A recent survey of 10 regions in Asia found more than half of Hong Kong adults under 40 years of age were unhappy. The next round of public consultations should be conducted in a sound and sagacious way. We should also hope for the best while preparing for the worst. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 09/17/2014 page1)

