 
A dynamic online survey by the Hong Kong Economic Times has found that nearly 70 percent of respondents said there was no discrepancy between their understanding of the "One Country, Two System" policy and the latest summary of the policy by the central government in its white paper. 
But in a sharp contrast to this, some dissidents have responded rather explosively. 
Martin Lee, one of the big shots in the opposition camp, accused Beijing of "daydreaming" immediately after the publication of the document on June 10. 
Some other prominent opposition figures have also protested forcefully against it, accusing Beijing of reneging on its promises. They set fire to mock copies of the white paper, claiming the document was as good as a roll of toilet paper. 
Members of pro-independence group Hongkongers Come First could not afford to miss the opportunity to perform political stunts. They rallied on Sunday outside the office of the British consulate-general in the city, begging London to take Hong Kong back and help make the city an "independent state". 
The white paper has set off "a firestorm" in Hong Kong, the International New York Times has declared on one of its headline articles. 
Why was there mass hysteria among dissidents and some Western media when the central government merely reaffirmed its authority over one of its special administrative regions - the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) - and clarified certain misinterpretations on its fundamental policy for the HKSAR? 



It came as the result of the shock they suffered from being given a wake-up call. They had previously assumed they were in a position to interpret "One Country, Two Systems" and the Basic Law of the HKSAR in ways that would facilitate their own political agenda for Hong Kong, and even for the country. 
Reveling in their illusion, many of the dissidents had convinced themselves there was room for maneuver to turn Hong Kong into a de-facto independent political entity, installed with a political structure of their own design and which would run in their favor. 
They had spared no effort in politicizing every social issue in the city, apparently believing that growing social discontent would help their cause. 
Some so-called stalwarts of the pan-democrat camp had repeatedly sought foreign support. They frequented Washington and London whenever Hong Kong's constitutional development reached a critical stage, hoping that external pressure would help coerce Beijing into making concessions. 
Quite a few radical members among the dissidents - particularly those hostile to the central government for ideological, historical or whatever reasons - even believed Hong Kong could serve as their working platform for effecting changes in the political system on the mainland. Many were not afraid of making their intentions known. They openly called for an end to the current political system on the mainland, and frequently meddled in matters there. 
Unsurprisingly, the political reform the HKSAR government is now pursuing is being used by dissidents as an opportunity to advance their agenda, the immediate priority is to force through an election mechanism they favor for the 2017 Chief Executive election. This is in the hope of helping someone from their ranks seize power in Hong Kong. 
Towards this end, they are planning to hijack the city's social stability and economic well-being by occupying its economic and financial center. This is to coerce the central and HKSAR governments into accepting their demands for an election mechanism which is inconsistent with the Basic Law. All this would naturally be done in the name of democracy. 
The white paper simply told some plain facts: Hong Kong is part of China and operates as a local administrative region directly under its central government. This should have been known to everyone - even primary school pupils - in the city ever since China resumed the exercise of sovereignty over the territory 17 years ago. Still, it has come as a great shock to the opposition camp. Some people in the city must have been daydreaming all these years. 
The author is a current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 06/18/2014 page9)

