


      The "Occupy Legislative/Executive Yuan" student movement in Taiwan is still going. This sounds like music to the opposition camp's ears in Hong Kong. The radical elements of the "pan-democracy" crowd are obviously overjoyed at the mess yet another "occupy" campaign is causing so close to home - or so close to the mainland. This is why a few of them have traveled to Taiwan recently to swap ideas with their hosts, hopefully, to duplicate the chaotic situation in Hong Kong which only devout Sinophobes can truly appreciate.
      
        The protesting students in Taiwan say they are doing it because they cannot accept the way the government tried to "ram" a service trade agreement with the mainland through the Legislative Yuan. They want the document resubmitted for minute scrutiny. In other words, what they want is "procedural justice". This is supposedly in the best interests of Taiwan businesses which will be directly affected by the agreement when it takes effect. If they genuinely mean it, they have yet to tell the public what they will do if the agreement is eventually passed in the legislature. Will they accept it then? That is everybody's guess at this point and the government has not agreed to grant the students' wishes. But at least the students have stayed clear of the goal Hong Kong's "Occupy Central" advocates are furiously advocating.
        
          In reality what is happening in Taipei and the "Occupy Central" campaign in Hong Kong have nothing in common except the word "occupy" and, perhaps, a fear of the mainland and its "communist government". In that sense neither "occupy" campaign is really about what the organizers claim it to be. They are really about something else.
          
            Although leaders of the "anti-service trade pact" campaign have categorically denied any political party is behind the radical act, there is no question they share the aspirations of the "green camp" on this issue. And the latter has always relied on its anti-reunification and pro-independence sentiment as a spiritual motivation in its political battles against the "blue camp" in Taiwan.
            
              The protesting students are obviously very proud of themselves after more than a 100,000 people appeared in Taipei's streets on Sunday to support them. But they have yet to establish a solid argument as to why they think the market access agreement will leave Taiwan businesses at a disadvantage.
              
                All indications suggest organizers of the "Occupy Legislative Yuan" campaign do not care about making a solid case against the pact with the mainland. They just want to block it or at least delay it by demanding a different legislative approach. How that will benefit Taiwan and service providers remains a big question. But one thing is quite clear: The student movement has proved a much-needed boost to the green camp's desperate attempts to regain public sympathy by demonizing everything the blue camp does.
                
                  That is the same formula the opposition camp here has adopted to convince local residents that Hong Kong is better off without close links to the mainland. Ever since the handover in 1997 the opposition parties have blamed the central government and the mainland compatriots for every problem in Hong Kong.
                  
                    In particular, they have shown inability to build a solid case against the Basic Law and relevant decisions by the National People's Congress Standing Committee concerning election of the Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017. They have tried sneaky tactics such as misinterpreting the Basic Law and the Sino-British Joint Declaration. This was to support their accusations that the central authorities backtracked on promises to give the SAR "full autonomy" in constitutional affairs. They also lied about Beijing's interference in regional affairs without offering hard evidence. This is despite the fact the British never gave Hong Kong any meaningful autonomy during colonial rule lasting more than one and a half centuries. Britain only offered a crude gesture of token democracy when it was clear China would resume sovereignty on Hong Kong in 1997.
                    
                      When their lies failed to achieve the result they wanted the "pan-democracy" parties seemed inclined to let a much more radical approach take over - in the form of the "Occupy Central" movement, in the hope of scaring the central authorities as well as the SAR government into granting their demands.
                      
                        One can easily see the cunning tactics by Hong Kong's opposition and their counterparts in Taiwan to gain the upper hand by creating or threatening chaos. This strategy reminds people of the "color and floral revolutions" the world has witnessed in recent years. These have something in common: They are all about "regime change" - and use demands for democracy as an excuse.
                        
                          Hong Kong is an inalienable part of Chinese territory. The city already has democracy and is working toward implementing universal suffrage. That means the "Occupy Central" advocates have no case in arguing for "true democracy", for which a "universal standard" simply does not exist.
                          
                            The author is a staff writer of China Daily Hong Kong Edition. ningym@chinadailyhk.com
                            
(HK Edition 04/04/2014 page9)

