



To the great relief of most citizens, Monday's clearance of the last "Occupy Central" blockade finally affords Hong Kong a chance to get back on track. But unless some misinterpretations of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle and misconceptions of democracy and freedom are clarified, a bumpy road awaits the Hong Kong SAR. 
There is no question that Hong Kong will advance democracy by implementing universal suffrage. The central government promised this, and it is enshrined in the Basic Law. 
The real issue with the city's proposed electoral reforms, and the subsequent political wrangling, is that many people here have misinterpreted the principle of "One Country, Two Systems". While some have done so inadvertently, others - particularly radicals - have deliberately misinterpreted it to suit their own political cause. This has been obvious in their insistence on demands that totally ignore the central government's constitutional rights over the political development of the SAR. 
Worse still, the few political fanatics among them have been peddling a so-called "Hong Kong identity", advocating the idea of Hong Kong "realizing self-determination", with the ultimate aim of turning the SAR into an independent political entity. 
Many of these political maneuvers have been conducted under the disguise of democracy and freedom. But the way the radicals went about trying to achieve their political aspirations was at best anti-democratic. 
By blocking the city's main thoroughfares for over two months, they went against the overall interests of society - as well as the will of the majority; in storming the government headquarters and the Legislature Council Complex, they displayed a disdain for authority; and by disobeying court injunctions, they attacked established concepts of the rule of law - one of the key cornerstones of the city's stability and prosperity. 
What the radicals have done during "Occupy" has nothing to do with democracy and freedom. Democracy is about majority rule and submitting to the rule of law. Democracy without the rule of law is a political tyrant with a better name and freedom without restraint is anarchy in practice. 
The events of the past few months have helped clarify these misinterpretations of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle and misconceptions of democracy and freedom. The question is: Are the political radicals in the city ready to face the reality and play within the legal framework and the boundaries of societal norms? Until such time as they are, Hong Kong will likely continue to face great challenges. 

(HK Edition 12/16/2014 page1)

