


      During the public consultation on the SAR government's constitutional development plans, the pro-establishment camp and "pan-democracy" camp each presented their own views on matters concerning the groups they represent. They disagree on many issues. The pro-establishment side maintains that the Basic Law and relevant decisions by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) provide the jurisprudential basis for the 2017 Chief Executive (CE) Election by universal suffrage; while the opposition camp seems to believe Hong Kong is an independent political entity and its elections must comply with Western standards. This is why it has put forward the so-called triple-track format which includes nomination by individual voters as well as political parties. The proposed "alternative" nomination format has been controversial from the beginning. The disagreement between the two camps has shown no signs of easing as they stick to their own scripts with little interest in reaching any mutual understanding.
      
        The SAR government has insisted on its motto of "Let's Talk". Its three-person leading group has spent a lot of time visiting local communities explaining the government's position and collecting people's views. It has achieved a remarkable degree of consensus at the grassroots level.
        
          However, apart from listening to different views and explaining the "five-step process" for the 2017 CE Election by universal suffrage, government officials have yet to declare which side the SAR government is on. I believe that the implementation of universal suffrage will happen. But it will be unfortunate if we stray from the right track outlined by the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC.
          
            The Basic Law took five years to draft, with concerted efforts by Chinese and British governments and representatives from Hong Kong. It was the product of the broadest possible consensus. As a constitutional document designed to ensure the success of "One Country, Two Systems", "Hong Kong People governing Hong Kong" and a "high degree of autonomy", the Basic Law has remained the foundation of the rules, policies and laws of the SAR. Its constitutional status and authority cannot be changed. Nor can it be challenged by any individual or organization. Therefore, any constitutional development plan formulated by a group to serve its own interests by deviating from the Basic Law is unacceptable. Article 45 of the Basic Law clearly stipulates how selection of the CE by universal suffrage will be implemented - that is "upon nomination by a broadly representative Nominating Committee in accordance with democratic procedures". Other important requirements include that the CE must be appointed by the central government. I believe the pro-establishment camp's insistence on implementing universal suffrage strictly according to the Basic Law suits Hong Kong's present situation very well.
            
              The relevant decisions of the NPCSC mentioned during the public consultation refer to those regarding the method for selecting the CE by universal suffrage announced by the NPCSC on Dec 29, 2007. These decisions, reaffirming Article 45, stipulates that selection of the CE by universal suffrage must be conducted upon nomination by a broadly representative Nominating Committee and formation of the Nominating Committee may refer to Annex 1 of the Basic Law on the formation of the current CE Election Nominating Committee. The "pan-democracy" camp may have its own understanding of the NPCSC decisions. But they cannot change the fact that the right of final interpretation rests with the NPCSC.
              
                Democratic development cannot proceed without the rule of law. People can express their views during the public consultation, but the process of CE election by universal suffrage must not deviate from the Basic Law or relevant decisions of the NPCSC. This is not only in line with Hong Kong's belief in the rule of law, but it also reflects mainstream views in society.
                
                  The author is a Hong Kong member of the CPPCC.
                  
(HK Edition 03/24/2014 page1)

