
Dear Countrymen:
In recent days the "Occupy Central" campaign has wreaked havoc on social order and the normal lives of people in Hong Kong, resulting in losses of 40 billion RMB. Therefore, we overseas Chinese are deeply concerned about the situation there. We are sending this open letter to our Hong Kong compatriots in the hope that you can take a position which incorporates love for both your country and for Hong Kong, abide by the laws, boycott the "Occupy Central" campaign, and persuade those participating in it to return to their work or school. It is our hope that we can see an end to this event, so that schools, traffic and livelihoodsmay return to a normal track.
Ever since Hong Kong's return with the Chinese mainland 17 years ago, the central government has strictly followed the "One Country, Two Systems" commitment to actively promote the development of a democracy in the framework of the Hong Kong Basic Law.
The National People's Congress Standing Committee's decision regarding electing the chief executive by universal suffrage on Hong Kong was a historic step forward with democracy in Hong Kong. Historically, during the British rule in Hong Kong, all the 28 governors were appointed by the British government, and Hong Kongers never enjoyed democracy in this regard, not even a pro forma one.
As spokespersons for some foreign forces, the organizers of "Occupy Central" have ignored the existence of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle and the Basic Law and openly organized illegal gatherings. They spread rumors, intensified contradictions, incited a small group of local residents and students who do not know the truth to block traffic, disrupt social order and undermine the stability and prosperity of Hong Kong. Ignoring the well-being of Hong Kong people, they have kidnapped the public, profaned democracy and disturbed people's normal life. If you let conspiracy take over, the dignity of our nation will be harmed, Hong Kong compatriots will suffer, and the foreign forces will laugh behind our backs. Thus, it will only hurt people dear to us and satisfy our enemies. We believe this despicable behavior should not be tolerated by the vast majority of Hong Kong people and will be despised by all Chinese!
Hong Kong is an administrative region of China. Hong Kong people are our compatriots of the same blood. Hong Kong's stability and prosperity are closely related to the vital interests of Hong Kong compatriots. It is also what all Chinese, home and abroad, wish to see. We sincerely hope for Hong Kong's social stability, economic prosperity, and democratic progress. The realization of these good wishes requires the joint efforts of both compatriots in Hong Kong and the SAR government. To this end, we urge the Hong Kong compatriots to distinguish right from wrong, to cherish democracy, and to persuade the participants of "Occupy Central", students or non-students, to recognize the true face of the organizers, and to return to work or school as soon as possible. Only with everything back on track and social order restored can you recreate a Hong Kong of greater prosperity and stability.
Sincerely,
Coordination Council of Chinese American Associations
United States-China Association of Commerce
The Chinese Alumni Associations of Greater Washington
The Union of Chinese American Professional Organizations
National Association for China's Peaceful Unification, Washington DC, USA
Fujian Association of the United States

 
 

