


      The Wall Street Journal's editorial piece on March 13 ("China's 'One country, two systems' trap") is a stain on the reputation of this highly regarded paper.
      
        As catchy as the article's headline is, its core proposition that Beijing has failed to keep its promises to Hong Kong is deceitful. Instead of presenting some convincing arguments, the article has expounded this assertion with distorted facts. The distortions are so obvious even to unthinking readers that one can't help but conclude: Either ignorance or political bias must have dictated the whole discussion.
        
          "Before taking over the territory (Hong Kong), Beijing promised that its local government would enjoy autonomy over all internal affairs, civil liberties would be protected and the judiciary would stay independent. None of those promises has been fulfilled," the WSJ article claimed.
          
            This directly contradicts the observation and assessment of the United Kingdom - the colonial ruler of Hong Kong until 1997.
            
              In its latest Six-Month Report to Parliament on Hong Kong published in February 2014, the British government concludes: "We consider that 'One Country, Two Systems' continues to work well, in general, and that the rights and freedoms enshrined in the Joint Declaration continue to be upheld."
              
                The UK government has repeatedly come to similar conclusions in its 34 reports to Parliament since the city's handover to Chinese sovereignty in 1997.
                
                  Someone must have lied about the development of Hong Kong.
                  
                    The British government has made its assessment and conclusion based on the direct observation of its diplomats, agents and proxies in Hong Kong.
                    
                      How has the WSJ come to its own version of this conclusion? The article cited the Feb 26 knife attack on former Ming Pao chief editor Kevin Lau as key evidence.
                      
                        The stabbing of the editor is "damaging to Beijing's efforts to convince the people of Taiwan to support official negotiations aimed at eventual reunification with mainland China," it claimed.
                        
                          The WSJ is virtually suggesting Beijing is behind this vicious attack.
                          
                            With the mastermind of this attack still at large and the reason for it still unknown, the WSJ assertion has gone beyond normal logic and sound reasoning.
                            
                              Obviously the WSJ author is well aware of the preposterousness of such reasoning, and has tried to bluff it out by conferring the title of "government critic" on Lau.
                              
                                However, a quick check on the Internet with the Google shows that the WSJ is the only media that has called Lau a "government critic". In all other related reports or commentaries - either in English or Chinese, the editor was referred to as "the soft-spoken Lau", "a moderate personality among journalists", or "a respected journalist".
                                
                                  Lau himself would have immediately denied this had the WSJ bothered to call him up for verification.
                                  
                                    In another argument, the WSJ article said in 2003 Beijing asked Hong Kong to draft an anti-subversion law. "That gambit died after half a million Hongkongers took to the streets," it claimed.
                                    
                                      The fact is the Hong Kong government is obligated to enact a national security law under Article 23 of the Basic Law, the legal foundation of the "One Country, Two System" principle.
                                      
                                        In fact, under British rule, Hong Kong had a number of laws regarding national security, which among other things allowed the colonial government to impose stringent restrictions on political organizations and assemblies.
                                        
                                          What the HKSAR government attempted to do in 2003 was to fulfill its constitutional duty and replace colonial-era laws on the subject with a new security law. There is nothing wrong with Hong Kong adopting a national security law. Many Western countries and Asian democracies have done this. It was only that Hong Kong's attempt to do this was made at the wrong time.
                                          
                                            The WSJ article misleads readers by suggesting that all of the protesters joining the large July 1 rally that year were targeting the anti-subversion legislation. The fact is, while some protesters expressed concern that the legislation might restrict their freedom, there were broader concerns at the time about the deteriorating social and economic conditions.
                                            
                                              The city suffered its toughest year in decades in 2003. The jobless rate jumped to a historic high of 8.2 percent from 2.3 percent five years before as Hong Kong's economy contracted sharply after being hit by a series of unfortunate incidents including the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the implosion of the city's huge real estate bubble in 1997 and the global dot-com bubble bursting in 2000, and the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the US in 2001.
                                              
                                                Because of a stagnant economy, property prices plunged 70 percent, leaving tens of thousands of middle-class families with "negative assets" and struggling to pay off huge mortgages. These woes were compounded by the outbreak of the SARS, which killed almost 300 people, frightening the public and aggravating their grievances.
                                                
                                                  As a result of people's general dissatisfaction with the social conditions, the annual July 1 celebration turned into a forum for all sorts of grievances.
                                                  
                                                    If only the WSJ author cared to have a look at the old news photos on file, he would have seen the many slogans or appeals of various natures, which went as far as rights for sexual minorities.
                                                    
                                                      The WSJ article repeated its little trick again when it presented another deceptive argument. "In a series of decisions, the National People's Congress in Beijing has also overruled judgments of HK's Court of Final Appeal (CFA) by issuing tortuous reinterpretations of the territory's mini-constitution, the Basic Law," it claimed.
                                                      
                                                        The fact is, under Article 158 of the Basic Law, the power of interpretation of this law shall be vested in the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC).
                                                        
                                                          So far the NPCSC has exercised this power four times to clarify the ambiguity of some provisions which have threatened to divide society - one on its own initiative, two on the request of the city's Chief Executive and another one on the request of the CFA. So where are the "tortuous reinterpretations" the WSJ is talking about?
                                                          
                                                            Obviously, the use of a series of distorted facts in supporting a political proposition has not happened by accident. It stands to reason that anti-China or Sinophobia sentiment has played a role in the discussion. This is evident in the other proposition of the article: "Beijing's unmet promises to Hong Kong are a lesson for Taiwan."
                                                            
                                                              The prospect of a united, stronger China gets on some people's nerves. Gosh, the cold war mentality is still very much alive despite the fact that the ideology carries less weight today in international relations.
                                                              
                                                                The author is a current affairs commentator.
                                                                
(HK Edition 03/19/2014 page1)

