


      Editor's note: A bylined opinion article was published by Xinhua News Agency on Saturday to expose the true nature of the "middle way" approach preached by the Dalai Lama. Following is the translation of the article.
      
        According to the White House, US President Barack Obama met with the Dalai Lama on Friday and expressed his support for the high monk's "middle way" approach.
        
          What on earth is this "middle way"?
          
            Since the 1980s, the Dalai clique has failed in its pursuit of "Tibet independence" by extremist means, under the backdrop of significant changes of the international situation and China's reform and opening-up.
            
              To get themselves out of trouble, the Dalai clique changed their approach, playing the "middle way" trump card and attempting to find a new way for the so-called Tibet cause.
              
                The Dalai clique claims the "middle way" is within the framework of China's constitution and nothing more than "a high degree of autonomy" over a proposed "Greater Tibet".
                
                  Though the "middle way" appears to respect China's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and does not specifically seek "Tibet independence", it is at odds with China's constitution and state system in every conceivable way. It is nothing but smoke and mirrors, camouflage and deceit.
                  
                    First, "middle-way" rhetoric has never recognized Tibet as a part of China. The "middle way" calls Tibet an "occupied state". The "middle way" is nothing but a historical and legal means of peddling "Tibet independence" when "conditions are ripe".
                    
                      Second, the rhetoric proposes a "Greater Tibet" - a region extending to Tibetan areas in the provinces of Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan and Yunnan - or roughly one-fourth of China.
                      
                        Third, the "middle way" demands "a high degree of autonomy", leaving all affairs but military and diplomacy under the control of the Dalai Lama. This amounts to the overthrow of China's state system on the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau.
                        
                          Fourth, the "middle way" requires the Chinese government to pull the People's Liberation Army from "Greater Tibet" and turn the area into an "international peace zone".
                          
                            Fifth, the "middle way" will drive other ethnic groups out of "Greater Tibet".
                            
                              The "middle way" means establishing "a state within a state" that rejects the leadership of the Communist Party of China. It does not adopt a socialist system; does not follow national laws and policies; does not allow the presence of the national military; and prevents other "nationalities" from entering.
                              
                                The "middle way" is nothing more than a political word game to realize "Tibet independence", step-by-step.
                                
                                  Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, Tibet - after important developmental stages, including peaceful liberation, democratic reform, establishment of an autonomous region, and reform and opening-up - has been on a development track in line with the development of modern China and the world. After more than half century of development, Tibet today, compared to the 1950s, has undergone profound changes.
                                  
                                    The Tibetan people have gained freedom, equality and dignity. They enjoy the fruits of modern civilization and strive for a new socialist Tibet, featuring unity, democracy, prosperity, civilization and harmony. Over 60 years, in the embrace of the big family of the Chinese nation and with commitment to the socialist path, people of all ethnic groups in Tibet have become masters of the fate of their society and themselves. Tibet has turned from poverty and backwardness to prosperity and civilization.
                                    
                                      Only by persisting with the leadership of the CPC, the socialist system and regional ethnic autonomy can the people remain masters of their land, that all rights of all the people can be realized and the fundamental interests of Tibetans be defended and developed.
                                      
                                        The monk's "middle way" contradicts history and reality. It is against the will and demands of the Chinese people of all ethnic groups, including Tibetans. The approach is a dead end.
                                        
                                          Relevant countries should be able to tell right from wrong and should not make false judgments and bad choices. They should do more deeds that truly benefit all Chinese people, including people in Tibet.
                                          
(China Daily 02/23/2014 page2)

