 As Hong Kong brought in the new year, it stood at historic crossroads. Whether or not the public consultation on arrangements for the Chief Executive (CE) election in 2017 and the Legislative Council (LegCo) election in 2016 can reach a consensus between conflicting political groups will greatly affect its future. The city is at a turning point as well as at a watershed in history. The two irreconcilable political camps are immersed in a decisive battle for political control of the city. A serious question arises: Who is standing on the right side of Hong Kong history? Is it the opposition movement or the "Love the Nation, Love Hong Kong" camp? 
2014 is also the 30th anniversary of the Sino-British Joint Declaration. Coincidentally or not, on Jan 3, the British authorities unsealed confidential files disclosing negotiations on Hong Kong's future between Britain and China and the plans by the then British cabinet regarding the handover of Hong Kong. The documents reveal London intended to introduce universal suffrage for the last governor to compel China to accept the CE being elected by one-person, one-vote. But this plan wasn't put on the negotiating table. It was kept secret until the documents were released. 
It is a historical fact that, in over 156 years of British colonial rule, Hong Kong people have demanded democracy six times. But the British at different times simply rejected this without any public consultation or compromise. Why, one may wonder, did London suddenly change its mind by granting democratic rights to Hongkongers before the 1997 handover? Obviously, London used democracy as a political tool - by introducing democratic reform into Hong Kong - to return the political control of the city to people loyal to Britain and the United States. This was also to defy China as she resumed sovereignty of the territory. Thus, from the very beginning, the city's two "paths" - the path of returning to China and path of democratization - have shown divergence and conflict. This fundamental political contradiction can be seen throughout recent Hong Kong history. 
Since July 1, 1997, the central government tried very hard to adjust the relationship of the two "paths" to concrete conditions in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR). Democratization is part of Hong Kong's historic mission. It should be in concert with a full return to the motherland. This should entail going from sovereign return to "soul return". "Soul return" means the majority of Chinese citizens in Hong Kong must recognize they are Hongkongers - but also Chinese.
However, many still identify themselves only as Hongkongers. Given a political situation in which the opposition still has the upper hand, the public consultation on constitutional development is likely to experience a deadlock.
Against this backdrop, the incumbent SAR government seems to want to undertake a mission impossible by introducing universal suffrage on schedule. The city's leaders are aware of their historic challenge. However, they are very determined. On Jan 1, Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying wrote on his blog that "he hopes students' text books will record that it was during his term in office that Hong Kong achieved universal suffrage." On Jan 2, Chief Secretary for Administration Carrie Lam said she and Secretary for Constitutional and Mainland Affairs Raymond Tam, "also want it recorded in the history that they both made contributions to universal suffrage in Hong Kong". I hope that they - standing on the right side of history - fulfill their mission in accordance with the Basic Law and decisions by the National People's Congress Standing Committee. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.



(HK Edition 01/15/2014 page1)

