 



Amid all the clamor about universal suffrage in Hong Kong, a commentary published on Monday in the Wall Street Journal by Carrie Lam, the chief secretary for administration, provided us with a good lesson in historical accuracy. This was a much needed answer to the current controversy on how to elect the city's leader in 2017. 
In her thought-provoking article, Lam reminded us that the Sino-British Joint Declaration signed in 1984 didn't mention "universal suffrage" at all. The Basic Law - adopted by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) on April 4, 1990 - is the first constitutional document to introduce the notion of "universal suffrage". What is more, it is worth noting that in 1990, with Hong Kong still under British rule, there was not a single directly elected seat in the legislature, not to mention electing Hong Kong's leader by universal suffrage. 
Many in the opposition camp may dislike Lam's straightforward remarks and find them hard to swallow, but she is simply revealing a historical fact. The document signed by then British prime minister Margaret Thatcher 30 years ago only stated "the Chief Executive will be appointed by the central people's government on the basis of the results of election or consultation to be held locally." In other words, in comparison with London, Beijing's attitude and sincerity over democratic development in Hong Kong is far more genuine and liberal-minded. The fact is democracy was never favored by any of the 28 governors during the entire 155 years of British rule. Even in the final years running up to 1997 handover, universal suffrage was still not an issue for last governor Chris Patten, who was hand-picked by then prime minister John Major and appointed by the British Queen. 
After replacing the Letters Patent and the Royal Instructions, the Basic Law came into effect on July 1, 1997. Hong Kong was finally able to embark on the broad road towards democracy. Ever since China resumed sovereignty over Hong Kong, the central government has lived up to its commitment by strictly adhering to the Basic Law and earnestly performing its constitutional duties. Hong Kong, enjoying executive, legislative and independent judicial power, including that of final adjudication, continues to prosper. 
Remember that the design of Hong Kong's political system is not an internal matter for Hong Kong to decide, but an affair relating to the exercise of sovereignty by the State over Hong Kong. In this regard, retaining universal suffrage, including the detailed electoral methods should be at the central government's discretion in light of the actual situation in Hong Kong. Universal suffrage in Hong Kong is an unprecedented, bold and momentous step forward. It should, therefore, be handled with extra care to avoid the catastrophic results which are frequently seen elsewhere in the world. 

(HK Edition 07/29/2014 page9)

