


      When Chris Patten gave evidence to the US Congressional Executive Commission on China a few days ago, he labeled the student protesters as "wonderfully principled". He said they had become the mainstay of the "Occupy Central" movement. Patten was more than happy to satisfy the whims of US congressmen with his one-sided views on China's leadership and how the US should use trade as leverage to make Beijing "live up to its promises".
      
        It was interesting to hear that this bipartisan US congressional committee now plans to amend its currently lapsed (since 2007) Hong Kong Policy Act of 1992 with an amendment known as the "Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act". Have human rights and democracy in Hong Kong deteriorated to the extent that this US legislation needs amendment? I also noticed that while all four congressmen on the committee denied the alleged claim that foreign powers were behind the recent "Occupy" movement, they all referred to the campaign as the "Umbrella Movement". I wonder who provided the script to them and also to the "occupiers" in Hong Kong. It is interesting they both use the same term to describe the illegal occupation. Could it be a coincidence or a conspiracy? Your guess is as good as mine.
        
          The US congressmen probably thought Patten, as Hong Kong's last colonial governor, had something important to contribute to their discussions.
          
            But they were wrong. Patten advocates "the one-size-fits-all" form of Western democracy for Hong Kong. He also shows scant respect for the constitutional status of the SAR under the "One Country, Two Systems" policy. He fails to realize democratic progress in Hong Kong must be "gradual and orderly" and in accordance with the actual situation here. It must also proceed as stipulated by the Basic Law.
            
              Patten may well be a liberal at heart, rather than a conservative, but his time as governor of Hong Kong epitomized the exact opposite of democracy. His recent comments expose his lack of understanding of what the students have been demanding over the last eight weeks. Political realities dictate that any democratic changes in Hong Kong must be based on meaningful discussions between all parties. The rule of law must always be respected and new changes must conform to established constitutional principles.
              
                The British press has carried very little on the recent erosion of the rule of law in Hong Kong. No wonder Patten described the illegal occupation, obstructions and violent skirmishes as something trivial happening on the sidelines. He made no reference to the Hong Kong Federation of Students, but praised its leader, Joshua Wong. But Wong has now been marginalized and has no clear vision of what to do next. Patten again absurdly compared the proposed Nomination Committee to Iran's election procedures! Come on, Patten, get real. Iran has an Election Commission of 11 people who can screen and bar candidates. But the current Nomination Committee for the election of the Chief Executive has 1,200 individuals, bodies and functional constituencies - the differences couldn't be greater.
                
                  Patten would like to see the Hong Kong government show more leadership in its willingness to listen to the students and pro-democratic groups, and to make concessions. But because Patten never mentioned it, I don't know if he is aware that the instigators of the "Occupy" movement have already disappeared from the scene. The "wonderfully principled" student leaders have moved the goal posts so many times since meeting senior government representatives, that another meeting would be a waste of time. Student leaders have lost credibility by refusing to condemn blatantly criminal attacks on the Legislative Council building. High Court injunction orders to establish the rule of law have also been challenged. I doubt very much whether Patten could actually prove that these student leaders match his romanticized view of them.
                  
                    Patten claimed many Western countries were afraid to challenge central government over democratic rights in Hong Kong because of trade and economic considerations. In this too, I am afraid he was incorrect. The main reason, I would suggest, is that these governments accept that since 1997 China has remained fully committed to the "One country, Two Systems" policy under the Sino-British Joint Declaration. Successive British foreign secretaries, in their monthly reports to the British Parliament, have repeatedly confirmed this.
                    
                      As a Special Administrative Region, Hong Kong enjoys a "high degree of autonomy" that "comes directly under the central people's government". However, student leaders - who try to portray themselves as "the representatives of all the citizens of Hong Kong" - need to come to their senses. They should realize they do not represent the majority of Hong Kong citizens. Moreover, their illegal activities enjoy no support from the public. It is time they accept reality. They should all return to their schools, colleges, universities and jobs. They should engage in peaceful talks on constitutional change. Then they can make a genuine, positive contribution to democratic progress in Hong Kong.
                      
                        The author is director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city councilor for over 10 years.
                        
(HK Edition 11/27/2014 page10)

