 



Mainland legal expert Rao Geping has literally stirred up a hornet's nest by suggesting Hong Kong enact an anti-subversion law sooner rather than later as the national State Security Law might be applied here one day. 
It seems this has become a taboo subject in the city. 
Some opposition lawmakers immediately threatened to take drastic action, including setting up a "de-facto referendum", if the Hong Kong government ever tries again to adopt an anti-subversion law after its failed attempt in 2003. 
Why should a mere reminder of the HKSAR government's constitutional duty, as discussed by Rao, be so dreadful to some sectors of society that it sparks such a strong reaction from them? 
Everybody knows that Hong Kong is required to pass laws prohibiting acts of "treason, secession, sedition, or subversion", under Article 23 of the Basic Law, the legal foundation of the "One Country, Two System" principle. 
Being part of China, Hong Kong is rightfully obligated to do so. Without such laws, this open city could easily be used by hostile forces as a bridgehead from which to subvert the State, as the central government has long been concerned about. 
Under these pre-set parameters, any anti-subversion law to be introduced by the Hong Kong government will understandably deal only with subversive behavior. 
From the very beginning of relevant discussions, there hasn't been any suggestion of any intention from anyone involved to reduce the freedoms Hongkongers have been enjoying. 
Why should any single law-abiding citizen fret about it then? 
Many Western countries and Asian democracies have long adopted similar laws to protect their countries against subversive activities. And people in those countries have been living the way they used to live, enjoying their freedom without bothering to realize the existence of such laws. 
If anything, the knee-jerk reaction and bitter objection by members of the opposition camp could only suggest they are prepared to commit subversive acts in future. 
So who really frets over the prospect of national security legislation in Hong Kong? 

(HK Edition 04/09/2014 page9)

