 
The British Parliament is reportedly launching an inquiry into the present situation in Hong Kong. As someone who was a visiting chair professor at Lingnan University during the critical time leading up to Hong Kong's handover back to China and who has followed events of HKSAR ever since, I think the parliamentary team conducting the inquiry has a difficult task. While its mission is to examine implementation of the Sino-British Joint Declaration of 1984 which set the terms for the transfer of Hong Kong's sovereignty, a proper review of Hong Kong's political situation should also focus on things the British did between 1985 and 1997 as well as what happened after 1997. 
Article 4 of the Joint Declaration says that "during the transitional period between the date of the entry into force (1985) of this Declaration and June 30 1997, the government of the United Kingdom will be responsible for the administration of Hong Kong with the object of maintaining and preserving its economic prosperity and social stability". The same article provides for "Chinese cooperation" in the course of the transitional British administration of Hong Kong. According to Article 31 of the Law of Treaties Convention (1969), a treaty (including agreement) is to be interpreted "in light of its object and purpose". Since the foremost purpose of the Sino-British agreement was to preserve the "current" system and stability of Hong Kong, this part of the declaration should be construed to imply the preservation of the "current" system as it existed in 1985. 
In spite of this commitment, the British caretaker administration unilaterally (without Chinese "cooperation" or consent) introduced some major changes which had far-reaching consequences for Hong Kong during the post-1997 period. For example, the British amended, and emasculated, the Public Order Ordinance in 1992 and the Societies Ordinance in 1995. They also created an elected Legislative Council (LegCo) which had never existed before in Hong Kong. This occurred as part of the 1992 political reforms initiated by the last governor, Chris Patten. These changes ultimately unleashed a "revolution of rising expectations" among supporters of the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong. 
Under the old Public Order Ordinance, organizers of demonstrations were required to apply for permits before they protested. The police were allowed to stop any demonstration they felt had the potential to disrupt public order. The amendments to the law meant this was no longer necessary: The organizers only needed to inform police of their plans to hold a protest. The police no longer possessed the powers they once had to stop protests they felt could be disruptive. The old Societies Ordinance, on the other hand, gave the governor the power to declare any society or organization unlawful if it was used or could be used for unlawful purposes - or "purposes incompatible with the peace and good order of the colony". The law also prohibited local groups in Hong Kong from having links with foreign political organizations, or to accept funds and other forms of assistance. 
If these ordinances had not been unilaterally (or illegally) tampered with by the caretaker British colonial government during the transition period, there would have been no need for legislation to be enacted under the controversial Article 23 of the Basic Law. More specifically, we would not be worrying now about the potential unrest arising from the "Occupy Central" campaign. 
The consequences of the police losing their power, due to the emasculation of the Public Order Ordinance, are now painfully obvious. Civic groups have had to unite to organize counter protests and collect 1 million signatures on their anti-"Occupy" petition. The movement aims to counter threats of demonstrations by the "Occupy" campaign, which threatens to disrupt Hong Kong's economy and social stability. The "Occupy" campaign grew out of "the revolution of rising expectations" created by Patten's controversial last-minute reforms on the eve of Hong Kong's handover. 
The professed goal of the "Occupy" campaign is election of the Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017. But this is a hollow and an unnecessary demand. This is because the National People's Congress Law Committee had already ruled on Nov 29, 2007 that "the election of the fifth Chief Executive of the HKSAR, in the year 2017, may be implemented by the method of universal suffrage." It also ruled that along with this, the election of the LegCo will also be by universal suffrage. 
Taking all this into account, if the British Parliament wants to do a thorough job examining the current situation in Hong Kong it cannot just look at what has happened in the city after the 1997 handover. It must also take into account the irresponsible actions of the British who made illegal changes and questionable decisions from 1985 to 1997. These have been the cause of many of Hong Kong's problems today. 
The author is a professor of Politics and International Law at New York University, and author/editor of 22 books, including Hong Kong the Super Paradox: Life after Return to China (2000). 

(HK Edition 08/12/2014 page9)

