 
The illegal "Occupy Central" movement held what it called the "Third Deliberation Day" (D-Day 3) on May 6. It featured some kind of a vote on different nomination formats for the 2017 Chief Executive election by universal suffrage. The 2,560 "valid" votes on all three plans submitted by "Occupy Central" advocates emerged victorious. All three "winning" formats demand "civil nomination" while reducing the Nominating Committee to a rubber stamp. This means they are merely three variations of the same theme. 
Besides the lack of a real choice, the vote was further trivialized by being open only to supporters of the "Occupy Central" movement. They were required to sign a "letter of intent" before casting their ballots. The organizers plan to hold an online electronic "referendum" next month. This will be open to all registered voters to pick one out of the three "winning" formats. 
The "D-Day 3" vote was at best a messy school project, at worst, a political joke. The fact the biggest "winner" (with more than 1,400 votes out of 2,560) is the one put forward by Scholarism and the Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) suggests that most, if not all the voters, are "fans" who share the two radical student groups' political aspirations. This also means "Occupy Central" has a long way to go before winning popular support among local residents. Some probably recall the organizers of "Occupy Central" once said they would gather tens of thousands of people to paralyze Hong Kong's central business district. Are they sure all the 2,560 individuals who signed the "letter of intent" and voted on "D-Day 3" will still join their illegal action? 
Maybe the organizers of "Occupy Central" hope to use the "D-Day 3" vote as a test of public sympathy for their cause. They claim it is in the pursuit of "true democracy (universal suffrage)" - although it is by illegal means. The result of the vote is more than enough to convince most people their illegal campaign is not popular. What a pity the organizers don't see it that way! 
They vowed at a press conference last Wednesday they would go ahead with a planned "e-referendum" next month to gauge public consent for "civil nomination" as well as for the "Occupy Central" campaign. It is hard to see how serious they are about the "e-referendum". One thing is clear: They have not addressed the main concerns of many people over the legitimacy of the upcoming online vote. 



A referendum, by definition, is the ultimate instrument of direct democracy - as opposed to representative (parliamentary) democracy. But the true nature of referendums explains why they are controversial and often dismissed as illegal in representative democracies. One needs to look no further than how the West, as well as the Ukrainian government, viewed Crimea's decision to secede from Ukraine based on a referendum. The Crimea referendum was called by the pro-Russia regional government. It saw locals vote overwhelmingly in favor of breaking away from the Ukraine. Not surprisingly it was immediately dismissed as illegal by the pro-EU Ukrainian government in Kiev and many Western governments - particularly in Washington. It will be very interesting to see what the same Western democracies, which called the Crimea poll illegal, will say about the planned "e-referendum" on constitutional reform sponsored by "Occupy Central" organizers. 
The "Occupy Central" organizers have not bothered to convince the public that it will be legitimate and in accordance with international standards. The Basic Law contains no mention of a referendum. This is because the right to use one is reserved only for the central government. Throughout the world, holding a referendum is a constitutional exercise for a government to initiate. But it must be approved by the judiciary and legislature. This is because in holding one, the authorities willingly hand the responsibility for an important decision over to the people. It must satisfy all legal, procedural and technical requirements for the result to be valid. It is also the main reason why parliamentary democracies around the world, including all Western powers, are extremely cautious about this constitutional exercise. Who can blame them? Referendums tend to be deeply divisive and sometimes destructive. It is little wonder some Western political scientists see them as evidence of government incompetence. 
The "Occupy Central" organizers can call it what they want, but the "e-referendum" can never be legitimate. It will only give referendums a bad name. After the "D-Day 3" farce some of opposition parties in the Alliance for True Democracy announced they would not participate in the "e-referendum". I'm not surprised, given that "civil nomination" did not have any statutory grounds to begin with. It is amazing how delusional the "Occupy Central" advocates are. They cannot even build a consensus with their own political allies. 
The author is current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 05/14/2014 page9)

