How can China, the world's second-largest economy, ensure it will not follow in the footsteps of big powers to seek hegemony? One can find the answer in a new foreign policy address by President Xi Jinping in which he vowed to develop a distinctive diplomatic approach, complete with salient Chinese features, befitting China's role as a major country.
Delivering a major speech on foreign policy over the weekend, Xi said that, instead of seeking hegemony like some big powers, China would follow an independent foreign policy of peace and pursue peaceful development and win-win cooperation.
China's interactions with the international community have become closer than ever before. Also, its dependence on the rest of the world - and vice-versa - and involvement in international affairs have increased. This means China should not consider only its own development demands on the international community, but also the demands and aspirations of the international community on China when handling international relations. Fittingly, boosting mutual interest continues to be a key part of China's diplomacy.
Xi has emphasized the building of "a community of shared destiny" in multiple international events since taking office. The notion underlines the importance of pursuing win-win cooperation, promoting a new type of international relations and seeking common development with an opening-up and win-win approach.
Abiding by this win-win approach, China will cooperate with other countries in every aspect of its external relations. It will not only try to safeguard its own interests and create space for its own development, but also leave space for others to develop. In the same way, it hopes to ensure its own security as well as wants others to feel safe.
Xi's speech underlines the importance of promoting "democracy in international relations", and emphasizes that all countries, regardless of their size, strength and level of development, are equal members of the international community. This makes it clear that, while moving ahead on the path to peaceful development, China will also help other countries to develop peacefully.
Under the leadership of Xi, a foreign policy rich in Chinese features is gradually taking shape. Over the past two years, China has taken steps to help build a new type of international relations, underpinned by win-win cooperation and the championing of a new vision featuring common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security.
China has also made efforts to build a new type of major-country relationship, put forward a neighborhood policy featuring amity, sincerity, mutual benefit and inclusiveness, as well as issued guidelines on its relations with Africa. The moves have demonstrated China's sincerity to the world and enabled other countries to take advantage of the achievements and opportunities brought about by its reform and development measures.
As an important force safeguarding world peace and promoting common development, China will remain committed to peaceful development, shoulder more international responsibilities, and prove to be a reliable partner and friend of the international community.
Xinhua News Agency
