


      Speaking at two separate seminars on Hong Kong's political reforms held in Shenzhen which were attended by Hong Kong's delegates to the National People's Congress and the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, as well as Hong Kong lawmakers on Thursday, Li Fei, deputy general-secretary of the NPC Standing Committee (NPCSC), urged all sectors of Hong Kong society to stand firm and strive towards universal suffrage.
      
        The implementation of universal suffrage is divisive. It is the biggest political issue since the handover. This is because the issue is not only about electoral arrangements, but closely related to Hong Kong's long-term prosperity and stability, as well as the nation's security and sovereignty. Common sense tells us that a house must be built on solid foundations if it is to last. The same principle applies when it comes to the implementation of universal suffrage. To prevent Hong Kong collapsing on weak foundations, we must stick to two fundamental principles: strict compliance with the Basic Law, and patriotic candidates for the post of Chief Executive (CE).
        
          One of the US founding fathers, Thomas Jefferson, defined the nature of this when he said: "In matters of style, swim with the current; in matters of principle, stand like a rock". Following this logic, in matters of national security and sovereignty, there is absolutely no room to maneuver so we should stand like a rock.
          
            The central government does not want to, and will not, interfere in affairs that fall under the SAR's autonomy, but it will not sit back and allow Hong Kong to become a base for subverting the political system of the mainland. Universal suffrage is not something the city can decide on its own, and it is necessary to stay alert to attempts by outside forces and their local proxies to interfere in China's domestic affairs. We must ensure Hong Kong's political power is in the hands of staunch patriots who are unconditionally supportive of the resumption of sovereign rule over Hong Kong by the nation, who faithfully abide by the Basic Law and do nothing harmful to the interests of Hong Kong or the country.
            
              This explains why the central government cares so much about the nomination process for the 2017 CE election. If the wrong person is elected to lead Hong Kong, it could pose a significant threat to Hong Kong's development and the country's national security. The SAR may attract more anti-China forces, the turmoil which would be triggered by this would plunge Hong Kong into a political and economic abyss.
              
                The vast majority of Hong Kong people support universal suffrage in 2017 - as promised by the central government. This is their legitimate right. But responsibilities and rights are the two sides of the same coin. In other words, a responsibility is implicit in every right. While we emphasize our rights, let's also shoulder our responsibilities. In this regard we are not lonely crusaders of right and responsibility, liberty and patriotism. Not long ago, US President Barack Obama recognized that "we have responsibilities as well as rights; that our destinies are bound together, that a freedom which only asks what's in it for me, a freedom without a commitment to others, a freedom without love or charity or duty or patriotism, is unworthy of our founding ideals." As such, a profound and accurate understanding of Hong Kong people's electoral rights and the central government's concerns will certainly help bridge the divide and narrow the differences in society.
                
                  Unfortunately there are those in Hong Kong who are well-aware that their self-proclaimed rights are not in line with the Basic Law. Their confrontational tactics are not in the best interests of Hong Kong society - yet they still insist on them. They even threaten to use illegal actions such as "Occupy Central" against both the central and the SAR government if the forthcoming constitutional reform package doesn't include "international formulae". Judging by their irrational ideas they are definitely not advocates of democracy, but rather trouble makers and spoilers whose only intent is to derail Hong Kong from its democratic path.
                  
                    Hong Kong's progress towards full democracy is now at a crucial stage. The NPCSC will set a framework for arrangements on the election of the CE in 2017 next week after deliberating on a report submitted by the SAR government. It is therefore vital for our fellow citizens to realize that rights and privileges are always accompanied by responsibilities and obligations, and to be able to "differentiate between what is good and what is bad", work towards a consensus on political reforms that enable 3.5 million eligible voters in the SAR to elect the next leader.
                    
                      In the process, whatever we do should be consistent with the Basic Law. Principles are not something that can be traded off or bargained with.
                      
                        The author is a senior editor of China Daily Hong Kong Edition. boblee@chinadailyhk.com
                        
(HK Edition 08/22/2014 page9)

