


      In Ancient Greece, democratic Athens had chattel slaves, Sparta had helots, and Oligarchic Thessaly and Crete had what might be called serfs. Today in Hong Kong, we have domestic helpers.
      
        Hongkongers may find the comparison of domestic work in the city to slavery as outrageous. They think the Erwiana Sulistyaningsih case as an isolated incident, and believe the city has only one or two evil employers. They think the overall system is legitimate and the majority of us are kindhearted.
        
          Unfortunately, Uncle Sam, the king of human rights, begs to differ. The Trafficking in Persons Report 2012, published by the US State Department, says Hong Kong "does not fully comply with minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking" and "authorities have made no discernible progress over previous years in law enforcement efforts against sex trafficking or forced labor."
          
            In the Trafficking in Persons Report's three-tier system of rankings, Hong Kong's position has dropped from tier one in 2008 to tier two in 2012. The city's ranking is now on a par not only with that of Congo, Serbia and Cambodia, but also with that of Ukraine, Iran, Indonesia and Sri Lanka.
            
              A report by Amnesty International into the plight of Indonesian domestic workers in Hong Kong also suggests that the problems are systemic. It found that recruitment and placement agencies in both Hong Kong and Indonesia are routinely involved in what Amnesty calls "trafficking" and "exploitation in conditions of forced labor".
              
                Identity documents, including passports, are routinely confiscated and movement is sometimes restricted. Agents routinely charge higher-than-advertised recruitment fees. This traps domestic workers, who are often silent about their working conditions because they need to work to pay back debts. For the Hongkongers' part, the report found "widespread payment below the minimum wage and denial of the statutory day off."
                
                  While most Hongkongers may not be aware, this form of labor has a name. It is called debt bondage, under which a person pledges his or her labor or services as security for the repayment for a debt or other obligation. Debt bondage has been described by the United Nations as a form of "modern day slavery".
                  
                    Article 1 (a) of the 1956 Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery defines debt bondage as "the status or condition arising from a pledge by a debtor of his personal services or of those of a person under his control as security for a debt, if the value of those services as reasonably assessed is not applied towards the liquidation of the debt or the length and nature of those services are not respectively limited and defined."
                    
                      Because of corruption in their home countries and high agency fees, foreign domestic helpers face notable indebtedness as part of the terms of job placements, which has the potential to plunge them into debt bondage. Although employers in Hong Kong are not the debtees, any reasonable person should be aware of the domestic workers' practice of assuming debt before they come. If we are involved in this trade, we cannot claim innocence.
                      
                        Our freedom from domestic work is enshrined in the Basic Law, of which Article 5 states that our "way of life shall remain unchanged for 50 years." Do we have bonded slavery before 1997? Yes. Is this part of our way of life? Certainly.
                        
                          On the brighter side of the story, recent historical scholarship has confirmed that direct democracy in Ancient Athens could not have happened had slaves not been deployed on a massive scale. That makes sense. Political involvement takes time. If there are referendums all the time on all sorts of issues big and small, who has time to do the laundry?
                          
                            If the wages of domestic workers are determined by modern capitalist means through a free market, we will have to pay them much more. Many local families will then decide not to hire a "maid" and spend time doing housework themselves. Both our GDP and our civic spirits will be affected. Taking into consideration all of these, we better stick to the Ancient Athenian way.
                            
                              The author is a current affairs commentator.
                              
(HK Edition 01/24/2014 page9)

