 
I am concerned about increasing episodes of violent behavior during recent protests in Hong Kong. 
This occurred as the Legislative Council (LegCo) Finance Committee scrutinized the HK$340 million government request for funding for the Northeast New Territories (NENT) development plan. It has had to do this for two weeks in a row. 
A small group of demonstrators opposed to the plan resorted to very aggressive tactics. Their behavior has become unacceptable - including a recent attempt to break into the LegCo Complex and deliberately damage LegCo facilities, such as fences and doors. I agree with Civic Party lawmaker Ronny Tong who described these protests as examples of "ochlocracy" - or mob rule. Following such violence last Friday, LegCo was forced to temporarily close an area adjacent to its car park. 



The demonstrators, on the pretext of wanting to protect their homes in the NENT, took an uncompromising, hostile stance towards the NENT development. But how many of these demonstrators actually live there? According to media reports many of the people leading these protests are well-known demonstrators. They frequently appear in different public protests and clashes with the government. 
Hong Kong people are privileged because everyone in the SAR enjoys the freedom to express their opinions. Such rights are enshrined in the Basic Law and the Hong Kong Bill of Rights Ordinance. These give people the right to peaceful assembly and to participate in public demonstrations. Police Commissioner Andy Tsang has said he respects freedom of expression in Hong Kong, but stressed it must always be conducted in a peaceful, orderly manner. 
This is exactly the point I want to make. I believe the public agree with this - as long as protests are law-abiding, everyone in Hong Kong will respect them. Many of us treat legal protests as a part of our children's civic education. They encourage young people to take an interest in society and to care about important issues. They can also help them think independently regarding social issues. As a father I have always supported my children's occasional participation in legal assemblies for this very reason. 



But in recent years certain student-organized public rallies have become extreme. Their behavior has become irrational. 
Regardless of the occasion, they have become aggressive, disrespectful of others and their conduct uncivilized - even violent. 
Consequently, parents who formerly encouraged their children to express their views on social issues may now change their attitudes. 
By using violence as a tool to achieve democracy, certain young people are actually embracing tactics which are the antithesis of democracy. 
These actions also help erode the chances of developing true democracy in Hong Kong. 
The author is vice-president of the Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 06/27/2014 page9)

