



The Hong Kong Research Association on Sunday released the results of its latest public opinion poll on "Occupy Central". The results show a clear majority of the public firmly oppose the illegal movement. 
This is further proof that most Hong Kong residents are now thoroughly sick of "Occupy" despite efforts by the opposition camp and its media allies to shore up its declining popularity. 
Indeed, numerous public opinion polls since the illegal movement were conceived and announced last year have never showed majority support for it. Even after the organizers claimed they had gathered almost 800,000 "votes" in favor of their demands for "public nomination" in a phony online "referendum" in June, which lasted for more than 20 days, they still failed to reverse the situation. 
Not long after this, in August, a petition organized by the Alliance for Peace and Democracy collected nearly 1.5 million signatures from local residents opposed to "Occupy". This petition completely exposed some myths about the illegal campaign created by biased media outlets in Hong Kong and overseas. 
Sensational photos and video clips shown on the Internet and television around the world (by an obviously biased media) may have fooled people elsewhere, but not in Hong Kong. The great majority of local residents never believed the excuses cited by "Occupy" organizers for blocking traffic in the busiest financial and business districts in the city. That is why honest opinion polls have always shown the illegal campaign was unpopular. 
An old saying sums this up well, "You can fool some of the people all the time or all the people some of the time, but never all of the people all of the time." 
The truth is no one can win majority support in a city like Hong Kong by attempting to take its economy hostage. From the very beginning, the self-proclaimed "pan-democrats" have never contributed very much to the healthy development of this city. On the contrary, they have long convinced people they are only good at opposing things for the sake of it. 
Only people who are brainwashed believe a political movement may have to make the masses suffer before it can prove itself worthy of their support. But anyone who now believes "Occupy" enjoys widespread public support does so at their own peril. It does not require a genius to see the folly of "Occupy" and its cheerleaders at home and overseas. The organizers need to calm down and think seriously about the impact of the campaign on ordinary people. Reading some history might also help. 

(HK Edition 10/20/2014 page9)

