
A Canadian supporter of China's reunification has four sticking points with the antigovernment protesters in Hong Kong. 
Dai Guofen, chairman of Chinese Canadians for China's Reunification, who is originally from Taiwan, disagrees with Occupy Central, whose movement has roiled the streets of Hong Kong: 
"From the historic point of view, we Chinese should never forget that Hong Kong was forcibly taken from China at the end of the Opium War and had been a British colony for 155 years until its return to China in 1997," Dai said. "The British had never allowed them democracy as all its 28 subsequent governors were appointed by the British government. The Basic Law is established on perspectives of evolution; the democratic reform should be step by step." 
"From the economic point of view, the Hong Kong stock [market] has jumped [fluctuated] more than 10 percent since the Occupy. Many people from [the] Chinese mainland and Taiwan have no idea to go to Hong Kong for visiting or shopping. As a safe and stable place to do business in the world, Hong Kong's reputation has been harmed." 
"From the [quality of] living aspect, the Occupy Central has caused increasingly serious impacts on people's livelihood. The traffic tie-up; the operations of school, hospital and other public institutes have been affected seriously." 
"From the perspective of politics, the slogan of Occupy Central has a conspiracy inside. Why don't they Occupy Queen's Road, Occupy Tsim Sha Tsui or other place? The Central alludes to Central Government of China." 
Dai continued: "China is now the second-largest economy in the world. Chinese has become strong and prosperous after one hundred years of humiliation, which should be cherished by us. However, the Hong Kong protesters' behaviors make our overseas Chinese sad. Some of them [are] even armed with the British flag. Do they hope China to go back to the period of 'divided and occupancy'? Do they hope China to be bullied by the western countries again?" 
"My points of History, Economy, Living, and Politics formulate the main idea of HELP. I want to HELP the [young] people in Hong Kong have the understanding of history and reality," said Dai. 
Li Jinhui, president of the Hong Luck Kung Fu Club, a Toronto nonprofit organization since 1961, told China Daily that his daughter was going to protest with Occupy Central recently because all of her classmates received an email that encouraged them to take to the streets. "She is only 13 years old; what does she know about the politics?" asked Li. 
"Hong Kong protesters say their goal is to pressure China into giving the former British colony full universal suffrage," Li said. "I want to know, do the 1.3 billion Chinese agree with the protesters' pressure? No, I don't think so." 
According to Li, Chinese Canadians struggled for the redress of the Head Tax for a hundred years since the Chinese Immigration Act was passed in 1885. The Basic Law has indicated that Hong Kong can retain its previous capitalist system and way of life for a period of 50 years after reunification in1997. 
"At what level can the protesters' desires be met?" Li asked. "The activists have done nothing but endangered Hong Kong and created chaos." 
Wei Chengyi, president of the Confederation of Toronto Chinese Canadian Organizations, said that the leaders of Occupy Central have taken advantages of the students' enthusiasm. 
renali@chinadailyusa.com 
(China Daily USA 10/06/2014 page4)

