



Thanks to the demise of "Occupy", which plagued Hong Kong for over 10 weeks, livelihood concerns such as housing have again dominated the front pages of the city's newspapers recently. 
This is an encouraging sign. Stuck in muddy street politics for too long, Hong Kong people have woken up to reality. They realize that the keys to democracy can't be found on the streets. The livelihoods of ordinary people must take precedence over other issues. 
For all the social ills and thorny problems to be fixed, sustained and higher economic growth is essential to provide the impetus to tackle them. 
The Long-Term Housing Strategy report released by the Housing Authority on Tuesday is timely. It shows that Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying's administration spares no effort to get things done. 
Hong Kong has, in recent years, lagged behind its regional peers competitively. It should move to the next stage and catch up with the times in tackling the most urgent livelihood issues such as housing, the elderly, poverty and the environment. 
Identifying the most pressing issues is relatively easy. Effectively solving these deep-rooted problems remains a more daunting challenge. Therefore, spelling out these thorny issues is only the beginning, more concrete and timely measures should follow. 
A pertinent case is that the government increased its 10-year target for new homes from 470,000 to 480,000. This was based on projections taking into account demographic changes and data on those living in inadequate housing. 
However the government might have difficulties in locating land resources to deliver its ambitious plans. 
Another daunting task that requires attention is the youth problem. Although "Occupy" was triggered by political fanatics, it is equally true that many apolitical youngsters took to the streets to vent their frustrations over the lack of prospects for upward mobility. Making it easier for young people to ascend the housing ladder can be seen as an encouraging step forward. After all, ignoring youth anxiety and inspiration could endanger the fabric of our society. Hong Kong can't afford to alienate the younger generation that represents the city's future. 
Few would argue that many problems faced by the Leung administration, such as the city's yawning wealth gap, originate from the past few decades, yet it is the current authority's responsibility to solve these age-old, inherited problems. 
While the public needs to be patient, time cannot be lost in introducing workable and innovative measures amid the worsening situation of sub-divided flats, cage homes and coffin-sized unit sales. 
The SAR government's traditional "hands-off" approach to governance has served Hong Kong well. However, maybe the time is now ripe for a strategic shift in this approach to allow it to play a more proactive role in the city's future development. 

(HK Edition 12/18/2014 page10)

