



Chief Secretary for Administration Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor on Saturday cautioned students against their planned boycott of classes, which may infringe upon other people's basic rights and disrupt public order. She reminded them to keep in mind that their actions could have adverse consequences for society as well as themselves. 
The Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) announced over the weekend that its members would begin boycotting classes on Sept 22. The HKFS action plan is in line with that of the illegal "Occupy Central" movement and indicates the opposition camp is determined to vent its grudges through radical acts designed to upset social stability in Hong Kong. It is further proof the radical faction has hijacked the opposition camp, and the largest student organization, in an attempt to hurt public interest in the name of "true democracy". 
Carrie Lam is right to ask students intending to boycott classes to gain a correct understanding of the resolution on Hong Kong's electoral reform by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) and ensure their protests do not violate the law. In light of the overwhelming public rejection of "Occupy Central" the opposition camp is obviously hoping certain misguided students will do the "dirty work" so the prominent "pan-democrats" - opposition lawmakers in particular - do not have to jeopardize their political careers by breaking the law in street protests. 
World history is littered with sad examples of the youth being sacrificed one way or another for the benefit of a few politicians. This time radical opposition groups are no doubt trying to do precisely that here in Hong Kong. The masterminds behind "Occupy" and the student protests can hardly wait for the passionate youth to clash with the police so they can capitalize on public sympathy for the "victims". 
The NPCSC decision is in the best interests of Hong Kong society as well as of the nation. Local students should understand the groundless accusations made by the opposition camp are meant to deceive the public and especially the younger generation. Opposition politicians are against the NPCSC resolution only because it makes it impossible for them to run for office as Chief Executive without pledging unconditional love for the nation and Hong Kong. Their anti-SAR government track records are unquestionable evidence that they simply cannot accept anything that does not serve their own personal interests. 
The students who are set to boycott classes should rethink their decision and question exactly why they should be the ones to sacrifice their own education for the ambitions of a few politicians. Ask those "Occupy" advocates what is so good about "genuine universal suffrage" if it must serve the personal interest of a certain few at the expense of the whole city, and why the great majority of Hong Kong residents are against the illegal movement. 

(HK Edition 09/08/2014 page7)

