


      Zhang Xiaoming, director of the Central People's Government's Liaison Office in the HKSAR, contacted legislative councilors from various parties to arrange separate meetings to discuss constitutional reform in Hong Kong. This is his way of honoring his promise made in Shanghai earlier this month to discuss the issue with Legislative Council (LegCo) members as soon as possible.
      
        It is clear that Zhang is showing opposition lawmakers his goodwill - as he has no problem communicating with pro-establishment LegCo members. At a meeting with visiting LegCo members in Shanghai on April 13, Zhang said he would meet those councilors who stayed in Hong Kong - within two months. In doing so, he has won the immediate respect of Hong Kong people for his sincerity.
        
          The opposition lawmakers have not all reacted positively. Some expressed a desire to meet Zhang because they appreciate the importance of communicating with the central government. Others are suspicious and have said publicly they are worried the meetings might be designed to "split the opposition". Others were much more hostile - threatening to use the opportunity to "teach Zhang a lesson".
          
            Constitutional development is a process through which consensus is vital to success. Only by sincere communication can all the parties concerned find common ground for building consensus. That is why Zhang joined LegCo members for lunch earlier this year. It is also why Wang Guangya, director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the State Council, and Li Fei, chairman of the Basic Law Committee of the National People's Congress Standing Committee, met some of them in Shanghai. Now it is time for the opposition parties to respond in kind. However, some seem to have lost the confidence and fierceness they often showed when shouting "fight for democracy". Why are they so afraid of communication all of a sudden?
            
              This is reminiscent of the same response by some opposition lawmakers to Zhang's recent invitation for a chat over lunch. Apparently, they did not want to be seen inside the Liaison Office building. It is to be hoped that further meetings between Zhang and LegCo members will not suffer from such attitudes.
              
                The central government promised Hong Kong universal suffrage as soon as the 2017 Chief Executive election. Seven million Hong Kong residents cannot wait for it to happen. Zhang, as the top representative of the central government in Hong Kong, has shown sincerity in communicating with all parties concerned. Let's see how the less-confident opposition lawmakers take the opportunity to show theirs.
                
                  The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                  
(HK Edition 04/29/2014 page9)

