 
2014 has ushered in the public consultation on methods for electing the Chief Executive in 2017 and forming the Legislative Council in 2016. Recently, the Task Force on Constitutional Development led by Chief Secretary for Administration Carrie Lam advocated a "let's talk and achieve universal suffrage" approach via television and on online videos. 
As a universal value, democracy achieves its best results through direct elections. Therefore, the government attaches great importance to the public consultation. Democratic elections, however, are not the panacea for all social problems. In other words, everything will not necessarily turn out well in a country just because it adopts democratic elections. 
Take the recent case of Thailand as an example. Thai Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra won an election to be the leader in 2011. Despite this, the Yellow Shirts, from a minority party, have launched a protest campaign to bring down the government. This has led to months of street demonstrations in Bangkok, resulting in school suspensions and the tourism industry being disrupted. This has impacted greatly on people's lives. 
Egypt is another example, as it has suffered continual political unrest after carrying out democratic presidential elections. As a consequence, Egyptians have lost the stable life they enjoyed before the elections. 



I'm not negating the advantages of democracy. On the contrary, I'm trying to make people aware of some facts, so the public gets a realistic understanding of democratic elections. As Sir Winston Churchill said, "Democracy is the worst form of government except for all the others that have been tried." Hong Kong should really deliberate on the most suitable political system before embracing the next stage of democratic development. 
Since 1997, the concept of "elite governance" has been gradually forgotten. Despite their rhetoric, many politicians, nowadays, care more about whether they will win the next election than in delivering concrete policies. So-called public opinion has replaced proper governance, resulting in many problems for society. 
When implementing complicated policies, it is not practical just to rely solely on public opinion. This can often result in simple ideas being generated without any real understanding. The government should deal with complicated issues by deliberate action and forward-looking policies. According to some experts, the ultimate form of democracy includes policies which reflect the demands, requirements and preferences of the public. 
The public consultation is now in full swing and it is common to hear different voices in Hong Kong society. But arguing about whether the new Chief Executive (CE) should love the country and Hong Kong is bizarre. After all, there is no way can Hong Kong elect a CE who's opposed to the central government. The position of Chief Executive is essentially a political one, so this basic requirement is actually fundamental to the future implementation of the Basic Law. 
Others people suggest that universal suffrage should abide with "international standards", arguing that a system of popular nomination should be adopted. But even the United Nations has not adopted this. According to UN's International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, universality and equality are sufficient for universal suffrage. With these two principles, a country or region can adapt its political system to a real situation. 
The Basic Law has already outlined the methods of CE suffrage, in which that the CE should be nominated by a broadly representative Nominating Committee. Popular nomination is not feasible at present because it deprives the Nominating Committee of its power. It is also incompatible with the Basic Law. 
We should treasure the chance of introducing universal suffrage in Hong Kong. But people here should discuss the issue pragmatically, without being distracted by pointless arguments which could hinder Hong Kong's political development. 
The author is vice-president of the Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 01/20/2014 page9)

