



Now that "Occupy Central" initiator Benny Tai has openly admitted his failure in threatening the central government, it is time for "pan-democrat" legislators to have second thoughts of their own. 
With a tenured professorship, from the very beginning Tai knew he wouldn't face many risks, and had a great deal to gain if he won. 
By trying to threaten the central government, Tai, a Johnny-come-lately in the political arena, made a name for himself. Tai successfully turned himself into a leading figure in the opposition camp - literally overnight. 
This has proven to be a risk worth taking for Tai in playing this political game. 
However, it is not a risk worth taking for most people - or for other members of the opposition camp continuing with the game. 
With more than 1.5 million citizens, or one fifth of the Hong Kong populace, having declared their disapproval of confrontation and political radicalism by signing the petition against the "Occupy" campaign, the popular will has been made unmistakably clear. 
In further evidence of citizens' disapproval of political confrontation, nearly two-thirds of Hong Kong people said they would accept a reform package for universal suffrage even if it were not so perfect, according to a poll taken by the Hong Kong Research Association two days after the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC) set up the legal framework for the election of Hong Kong's next Chief Executive by "one man, one vote" election. 
Now Hong Kong people are preparing for an unprecedented level of democracy to be realized through the introduction of universal suffrage in 2017. 
Opposition lawmakers will go against the will of the majority should they go ahead with their threat to veto any electoral reform package based on the parameters established by the NPCSC. 
The political backlash will prove to be too great for these political figures to withstand. Many of them will suffer disastrous setbacks in the 2016 Legislative Council election. 
Misguided students and other young people are unlikely to fare any better if they carry out their plans to participate in the "Occupy" movement or any other illegal activities. A criminal record can ruin a person's life. 
Hong Kong does not have a tradition or culture for confrontation or radicalism. The city's achievements today have been brought about by adopting a gradual approach to change. 
Perhaps it is time for the hotheads to cool down and have second thoughts about their endeavors. 

(HK Edition 09/05/2014 page10)

