



With "Occupy Central" raising concerns about Hong Kong possibly becoming less relevant in a future national development strategy, the current Beijing trip of the city's top financial and monetary officials will be closely followed. 
The delegation is made up of the city's top three financial and monetary officials. They are scheduled to meet national-level officials from key departments responsible for fiscal and monetary policy. These include the China Securities Regulatory Commission, the China Banking Regulatory Commission, the Ministry of Commerce, the People's Bank of China and the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the State Council. 
It is widely believed that Financial Secretary John Tsang, Secretary for Financial Services and the Treasury K.C. Chan and Hong Kong Monetary Authority Chief Executive Norman Chan are seeking to boost the city's status as an international financial hub by strengthening financial cooperation between the SAR and the mainland. 
They are expected to discuss further cooperation in various areas such as fund flows, yuan business and Hong Kong's future role in free trade zones to be developed on the mainland. Any breakthrough in these areas could serve as a reassurance that the city will maintain its role as a conduit between the mainland and foreign countries. This could be of great significance to the city's efforts to maintain economic prosperity. 
Unquestionably Hong Kong's ability to maintain its economic vigor in future depends greatly on the SAR's ability to continue to fulfill its role as an intermediary between the mainland and other countries - a unique role it has successfully played for many years. 
Despite the constraints of land scarcity and a lack of natural resources and technological innovation, Hong Kong has enjoyed more than three decades of enviable economic prosperity. 
Much of this phenomenal achievement derives from serving the needs of the mainland and acting as a springboard for overseas companies dealing with the mainland rather than its colonial legacy, or the merits of a Western-style system. In fact former colonies are everywhere - South Asia, South East Asia, Africa, South America and other parts of the world. Many of them are much touted democracies. But they have failed to achieve the same kind of economic success as Hong Kong. 
This goes far in explaining Hong Kong citizens' strong disapproval of "Occupy Central", a campaign advocating ideas that can only erode the central government's confidence in the Hong Kong SAR. They are fully aware Hong Kong can't afford to lose the trust and blessing of the central government. 

(HK Edition 11/04/2014 page10)

