
As the country's power grows, Britain can be a useful role model, academic says 
China can learn great soft power lessons from Britain in making its values understood and appreciated internationally, says Leslie Young, an economics professor at the Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business in Hong Kong. 
Young says the way Britain initiated the modern world by making its language, traditions and culture accepted in many Western countries is a crucial skill that will help China gain international respect commensurate with its newfound economic might. 
At the same time, China can learn more about how to communicate with the West through its relations with Britain, many of whose values and norms dominate the way the modern world functions. 
"Britain initially started the modern world. Everyone uses English as a universal language. The suits that gentlemen around the world wear is an English gentleman's suit. The (globally accepted) institutions of law, finance and accounting are British," Young says. 
Just as Britain was very powerful in the colonial era, China now has an unparalleled global importance but, because China's rise has been so fast, it has outrun its understanding of itself and of the world, and this can be dangerous, Young says. 
He compares China's rise with a young person who has just inherited a large sum of money and is bound to make mistakes sooner or later. One way this can be avoided is by learning from Britain's history, he says. 
"China has a lot to learn from the UK, and the UK is the most obvious source because it is the most successful example of a peaceful power and a cultural empire in the world." 
Young was speaking at CKGSB's European headquarters in central London not far from landmarks such as the Houses of Parliament, Westminster Abbey and the Tower of London, which many Chinese tourists visit every day. 
But Young says it is not good enough for them simply to take photos of these tourist spots without understanding the deep symbolic meanings behind their history. 
Young says the knights in armor with their swords at the Tower of London represent the catalyst of democracy in Britain because the knights' initial request to the king to share power resulted in its diversified distribution. This power later trickled down to landowners and peasants. 
"When you have swords and armor, what you have is the distribution of power. The Western system that we see today is inherited from that distribution of power, and that's how parliament started." 
The knights and monks commemorated at Westminster Abbey are celebrated for their honor, which in English culture is dictated by strict codes, Young says. 
If one stabs one's enemy after he has tripped over, there is no honor. In British culture, Young says, honor is achieved by two adversaries fighting one another on equal terms, which is not the case in Chinese culture. 
So if Britain's history and culture are the foundations of Western society, then the Chinese government should actively do more to make sure Chinese people learn from Britain and is able to understand and communicate better with the Western world, Young says. 
Chinese people's lack of understanding of the West has led them to behave, often unwittingly, in ways that have attracted resentment overseas, he says. 
He cites the tendency of young Chinese in London to board underground trains before allowing passengers to get off, something that is common in China, Young says. 
"This is only an example on a personal level. Perhaps it's not too serious. But the same mistakes have been made on higher levels in terms of investments and political relationships with other countries. This is where China could stumble." 
Such behavior could greatly harm the next stage of Chinese outward development, he says. 
In Western people's attempts to avoid racism, they inevitably see China and Chinese people through their prejudices of the communist Soviet Union during the Cold War, which is an image of aggression. 
But if Chinese adopt and understand more Western practices, then prejudices and preconceptions will not crowd out what China has to say to the rest of the world, he says. 
To achieve this, Young believes it is a good idea for the Chinese government to send young leaders in every field to work in equivalent British institutions for a few years and understand how things are done in Britain. 
The Chinese government should also encourage Chinese international students studying in Britain to spend more time making friends with locals, rather than forming close friendships among themselves. Wherever possible, the Chinese government should also go out of its way to create opportunities for Chinese students to mix with their Western counterparts. 
Apart from gaining acceptance by adapting Western practices, China can also learn an important lesson from Britain in how to spread its messages on the global stage in a peaceful and welcomed way. 
"The English have promoted (their) values, and people like those values. People don't have to wear a suit, a tie and white shirt, but people do because that's quite a comfortable and attractive costume, flexible and convenient." 
Extending this shirt-and-tie analogy to China, Young believes the Chinese traditional values of diligence, accepting long-term obligations for one's behavior and humility for one's achievement are key values China can promote abroad. 
Such values will benefit the world, and acceptance of these values internationally will help China gain respect as a country. And the best way to spread these values is through the Chinese migrants. 
Young says Britain is a natural ally for China in its endeavor to build soft power abroad. Helping China in this endeavor will be a great opportunity of economic and political development for Britain. 
This is because China is set to become a global superpower, and its global influence will help Britain improve its international status as a trusted partner. 
"Britain in the 19th century was a dominant world economy for its economic and military power. In the 20th century it was an important military power through its partnership with the US. In the next 100 years it could become more powerful than its economic and military power entitles it to be, by being a constructive partner that is uniquely valued by China." 
The process of China-UK bonding is easy to achieve, as Britain and other English speaking countries are already the favored destinations for Chinese migrants, students and tourists, Young says. 
Apart from learning lessons from each other, Britain can also use its power in international institutions to give China a stronger voice. 
"It's absurd that the G7 doesn't include China, and China has limited voting power in the International Monetary Fund. Currently the US tries to play a game of going with international trade, because it is engaged in long-term negotiations with the EU about a free trade agreement. This is damaging for the global economy, and China actually doesn't have a say." 
But Britain has a voice, and if it uses this to help China deliver its message, then it can open doors for China, and help Britain, he says. 
Sadly, Britain does not see this opportunity because its understanding of China is still limited. Just like Chinese tourists' limited understanding of the stories behind those London landmarks, the British do not understand the stories about China, he says. 
But Young feels confident this will change in the foreseeable future as mutual understanding of one another grows, and Britain's culture of readily accepting foreign cultures and practices makes this move much more promising. "Of all nations in the world, they're the ones most likely to learn." 
Wang Shiyu contributed to this story. 
cecily.liu@chinadaily.com.cn 






 
Leslie Young says China can learn more about how to communicate with the West through its relations with Britain. Cecily Liu / China Daily
(China Daily USA 04/23/2014 page15)
