



Unlike many previous protests in Hong Kong, "Occupy Central" includes a large number of young people. These protesters are mostly tertiary students; some are high school students. The post-80s or 90s generation has even replaced "pan-democrats" by playing the leading role in the meeting with government officials. 
These young people have passion and idealism, and by all accounts, they are good-natured. But some serious questions arise: Do these kids really know the true meaning of democracy? To what extent do they understand "One Country, Two Systems", especially when it comes to Hong Kong's political reforms for which the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) holds the ultimate authority? Do they realize Hong Kong is not an independent political entity but a special administrative region of China? Do they know universal suffrage for Hong Kong was never mentioned in the Sino-British Joint Declaration signed in 1984, or that the notion of universal suffrage was actually first introduced in Beijing's draft of the Basic Law? Such questions are endless. 
Judging by the words and deeds of these young people, one senses that their knowledge is superficial, yet they are discussing political matters mostly beyond their understanding. A pertinent case is that the underlying principles regarding the election of the Chief Executive (CE) of the Hong Kong SAR were already made clear in the Basic Law, promulgated in 1990. The NPCSC's framework, announced on Aug, 31, only reaffirms the position. 
The demonstrating students demand that the NPCSC should retract its decision. They advocate public nomination of candidates for the post of CE. Such demands are legally flawed and politically naive. It is legally flawed because it is unconstitutional. Article 45 of the Basic Law clearly states that candidates must be selected by the Nomination Committee. And it is politically naive because, as the country's highest legislature, the NPCSC's decision has "unshakable legal status and validity". 
Former US president Franklin D. Roosevelt once said, "Democracy can't succeed unless those who express their choice are prepared to choose wisely. The real safeguard of democracy, therefore, is education". Assuming the presidency at the height of the Great Depression, Roosevelt brilliantly led the United States through the difficult times which followed. It would be worthwhile for Hong Kong students to consider his words. We all know democracy is a laudable goal, but ideals and faith alone are insufficient to make it function for the benefit of society. Students need knowledge and critical thinking to better appreciate democracy. Often democracy is beautiful in theory, but in practice it can be a disappointing failure. This can be seen not only in the Middle East and Asia, but even in mature European and American democracies. 
Has Hong Kong's biggest standoff in decades actually achieved anything for the sake of democracy? The answer is a definite "no". The outcome of "Occupy", in retrospect, was determined from the beginning. As the numbers on the streets continue to dwindle and public patience wears thin, many young protesters realize that illegal, destructive acts such as "Occupy" will prove unacceptable to the public. 
"Occupy" has dragged on for three weeks with no clear solution in sight. But students and their parents, as well as society, should nevertheless be thankful that protests have not spiraled out of control or become excessively violent - despite some scuffles. The credit for this must go to the police, who have shown great professionalism and restraint. 
With "Occupy" continuing, both police officers and students are mentally stressed and physically exhausted. Anger has been growing among residents. They are tired of endless disruption to their daily lives. What will happen next is unpredictable. Hopefully, this high-stakes political game being played by a bunch of radicals can finally end, peacefully. 
No matter what the result is, it is time for those involved to realize the "Occupy" campaign, under the banner of democracy, has lost its luster and, due to its destructive nature, become a "negative political asset". They should now withdraw and allow Hong Kong to return to normal life. 
Instead of occupying the streets, students should have won over the public through moderate, sensible dialogue. "Students are Hong Kong's future, and today's students could become Hong Kong's Chief Executives in the future." - let's remember the words of former chief executive Tung Chee-hwa and focus on reality, not idealism. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 10/22/2014 page10)

