
The Chinese people should not shy away from what the China Model has accomplished economically and politically, says Fudan University professor and author Zhang Weiwei. 
"Some people dare not use the term, because they don't think the China Model can be transplanted anywhere else around the world or China does not have enough achievements to justify its model," Zhang in a recent speech titled Why the China Model Can Surpass the Western Model at Beijing Foreign Studies University recently. "They only believe in the American Model." 
The China Model features a strong government hand on till of capitalism. 
According to Zhang, the American Model divides society into different interest groups, with each group represented in voting. 
"But when the model is transplanted to any other non-West countries, it will invariably fail," Zhang said. 
Zhang said many Chinese lack confidence in their way of life compared with the West. Zhang's three books on the China Model sold more than 1 million copies. Zhang says the aim of his writings is to make people aware of the China Model's rationality. 
Zhang earned a bachelor's degree in English literature in Shanghai and doctorate in international relations in Geneva. He was a translator for Deng Xiaoping in the mid-1980s and now works for Fudan University and the Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences, a Chinese government think tank. 
Zhang considers his critics, whom he described as "liberal intellectuals", to be his main readers. He does not defend China against attacks from the West but compares China with the West through history. 
"Reading my books can make Chinese people feel happy with their life and hopeful for the future," he said. 
China has more than 2,000 years of civilized history, divided and united," Zhang said. "The China Model is to choose the most qualified people through the imperial test system to govern the country. To some extent, the West learned from China's experience while exploring its democracy. 
"For most of the time in history, China's achievement and progress [came] under a united authority," Zhang said. "It is this case today as well." 
Zhang said the China Model is not a rigid and closed system. It's a result of the interaction between China and the outside world, particularly after the first Opium War in 1840 between China and Western colonialists. 
"The Renaissance and the Industrial Revolution help the West make breakthroughs in thoughts and practices," Zhang said. "From then on, the West is evolving into a new civilization. That's when China started falling behind." 
China is in a catch-up phase now, he said. The reform is a process to assimilate the valuable lessons from the West. But China should never ignore its own history and national conditions. 
He warned that the Chinese people should not be blinded by Western values. 
"Universal values should be defined by the international community together," he said. "All human beings pursue peace and harmony." 
"Many Chinese people romanticize the West, in part due to its influential media, popular culture and consumerism, and feel pessimistic about China because of some problems in Chinese society," said Zhang. 
"Corruption will grow fast whenever a country is developing fast, or the wealth is growing fast, because the maturing of the supervision institutions cannot catch up with the pace of national development," Zhang said. 
He also is concerned about what is being taught in Chinese universities. 
"The Western discourse dominates the teachings of politics, international relations, journalism, law and economics in Chinese universities," Zhang said. "This is even more serious of a problem than the bureaucracy on campus that is widely blamed by the public." 
Following the law as it is done in the US is also a concern for Zhang. He said the cost of such legal adherence is "very high" and sometimes "very unfair". 
The cost of social governance under the rule of law is also too high, Zhang said. 
"We must leave a small space to solve issues through political ways under the principle of rule of law, because China is a country too complicated to implement complete rule of law." 








 
China Model brings about fast economic growth as well as smoggy air to China, as shown in the picture taken in Shanghai. Gao Erqiang / China Daily
(China Daily USA 10/24/2014 page6)

