
The "Occupy Central" protesters started their movement with high ideals: They want "true democracy", "genuine universal suffrage" and equal rights for everyone. This all sounds great. It has strong appeal for young people aspiring for a more just society. But what is a just society? 
A just society must be one that shows equal respect and representation to each member of that society, particularly when considering major public policy issues. But what exactly does all this mean? 
We need to put aside our own identities, and attempt to put ourselves in the shoes of others member of society. 
This kind of thinking places each person's rights on an equal footing. The interests of the minority are then protected from the tyranny of the majority. In genuine democracies which essentially follow majority rule (and where elected politicians aim to reward the voters who voted them into office), the interests of strong political players are promoted at the expense of the weaker players. 
The September 2014 issue of Perspectives on Politics, the journal of the American Political Science Association (APSA), carried an article in which Martin Gilens of Princeton University and Benjamin Page of Northwestern University came to a conclusion which supports this argument. In their study of American democracy, they wrote: 
"Multivariate analysis indicates that economic elites and organized groups representing business interests have substantial independent impacts on US government policy, while average citizens and mass-based interest groups have little or no independent influence. The results provide substantial support for theories of Economic-Elite Domination and for theories of Biased Pluralism, but not for theories of Majoritarian Electoral Democracy or Majoritarian Pluralism." What does this mean? In plain language, democracy in the US has ended up promoting the interests of big business - not the interests of the average person. 

Now, what the "Occupy" protesters want surely cannot be domination by large business interests? They speak so highly of democracy according to "international standards". The US political system is presumed to be consistent with these standards. But what are the results? 
So what are the advantages of genuine universal suffrage? How will Hong Kong people actually benefit from it? The unfortunate thing is there is no concrete empirical evidence to show that "genuine universal suffrage" will benefit the ordinary citizen. The main benefit is really only a vague belief that people have become "more equal". 
A search for the benefits of democracy yields the following list: protection from abuse of power, limited majority rule, individual liberty, and legal protection. However, in international comparisons Hong Kong rates highly on these issues. Indeed, according to the World Justice Project 2014, Hong Kong ranks higher than the US in the absence of corruption, open government, order and security, effective and accountable regulation, civil justice, and criminal justice. Hong Kong ranks lower than the US only in constraints on government powers and in fundamental rights. 
Once the central government's concerns over national security have been addressed we should get a more open nomination process. However, most of the presumed benefits of this are still quite vague. There is no evidence to support the idea that adversarial democracy and elections improve the quality of public policy. 
This, unfortunately, is the reality. Therefore, all this recent disruption of public order, social and economic life in Hong Kong, is unwarranted. I know many young people are not happy with things like housing prices which are now beyond their reach. However, to solve these problems, we need to work together and not fight with one another. The benefits of "Occupy", even if successful in terms of achieving a lower nomination threshold for the Chief Executive, remain elusive. But the costs will be high. 
The author is director of the Centre for Public Policy Studies at Lingnan University. 
(HK Edition 10/07/2014 page10)
