
I took a flyer from a Lingnan University student activist last week. The flyer carried the slogan: "Lingnanians! All Determined to Boycott Classes in Civil Disobedience!" Now I understand their disappointment with the political reform framework recently announced by the National People's Congress Standing Committee. But I disagree with their tactics for pushing their political ideals, and that "genuine universal suffrage" - as they define it - will solve all the problems which they claim are plaguing Hong Kong. 
If they want a lower threshold for aspiring Chief Executive (CE) candidates, they should work toward building mutual trust with the central government, rather than undermining it. 
"Students boycott classes not for their self-interest, but because this is a critical moment for political reform. We need to recover political autonomy that has been taken away," the flyer began. "We need to determine our own destiny. Today's Hong Kong is plagued by all kinds of problems: the rule of the land-owning class, the collusion between government officials and business; policies that favor the wealthy and those with social status and ignore the plight of the poor. All these problems stem from a political system that is not democratic..." 



It is good that students are concerned about issues in society, but frustrating and sad to see students blind to the truth. No one denies Hong Kong has problems which we all need to work together on to resolve. But students cannot be blind to the considerable efforts the SAR government has made to deal with these problems. In order to break the "hegemony of the land-owning class", CE Leung Chun-ying has worked hard to increase the supply of housing and land, to improve transparency in the housing market by introducing the Residential Properties (First-hand Sales) Ordinance. For the first time, practical, detailed requirements for sales brochures, price lists, show flats and sales arrangements were introduced. A saleable area must now be listed along with the property prices per square foot/meter in sales brochures and advertisements. Misrepresentation and the dissemination of false or misleading information is now punishable with heavy fines, or even imprisonment. Certainly this is not a pro-business approach by the government. So where is the evidence of a systematic government-business clique - as alleged by the students? 
Lingnan students must surely also have read the news that the Leung government was the first in Hong Kong to define a poverty line and the first to introduce a family allowance for low income earners. I have advocated this policy in this column many times. Lingnan students should also know that the SAR government, which they attack, has doubled the old-age allowance for the elderly poor. They should also remember that the CE also stopped all quotas for mothers from the mainland giving birth in the city. 
I am baffled and disappointed that the students should blame the SAR government for numerous problems in Hong Kong while neglecting to mention some of the good things they have done. 
I do not blame them for being disappointed. I have voiced my disappointment too, as I believe the threshold for CE aspirants becoming candidates could have been lower if there had been greater mutual trust. But imagining that "genuine universal suffrage" would fix all the problems the students mention is pure fantasy. I wish they would study how democracy performs in reality. Better still, I wish they would come up with ways to improve the democratic process. 
The flyer blamed the lack of "genuine universal suffrage" for "relentless increases in rents and home prices" and for collusion between government and business. Brazil and Spain have democratic governments. But housing prices have tripled since 2008 in Brazil. Spain's housing price index rose from just over 600 in 1995 to almost 2100 in 2008 and has now collapsed, leading to a severe recession and 25 percent unemployment. 
Democratic Japan has also had its problems. Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO), responsible for the country's nuclear power generation plants, oversaw the serious meltdown in Fukushima following the Tohoku earthquake and resulting tsunami. This led to about 20,000 deaths. But TEPCO would not have failed to implement safety improvements without being allowed to do so by government authorities. 
The flyer blamed the Leung government for trying to introduce "brain-washing" national education into school. But these students did not spell out exactly in what way the proposed national education was "brain-washing". The CE had openly invited the Parents Concern Group to join a committee to oversee the implementation of national education. But his invitation was rejected. 
Interestingly, in the United States, virtually all the media criticized the Dixie Chicks, a popular country music band, for being unpatriotic when its lead-singer openly criticized George W. Bush for his 2003 decision to invade Iraq. But this decision has since been shown to be disastrous and ultimately against US interests. So it seems that the media had been brain-washing or were brain-washing people - even in democratic US. 
The author is director of the Center for Public Policy Studies at Lingnan University. 

(HK Edition 09/16/2014 page1)

