


      Last Tuesday the central government published its first white paper on the implementation of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy in the Hong Kong SAR since the 1997 handover. The document represents Beijing's attempt to set the record straight on key issues. These concern Hong Kong's constitutional status and relationship with the central government as prescribed under the nation's Constitution, the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC).
      
        It understandably made the opposition camp panic. The latter and their Western sponsors have long been misinterpreting, and even lying, about issues in the white paper to serve their own interests.
        
          The "pan-democracy" figures who spoke to the press last Tuesday almost unanimously focused on the timing of the white paper and how they perceive its impact. It is only natural they are upset about it. Its content dispels the lies they have been spreading about "One Country, Two Systems" since the 1980s. One of them caught my attention with some inflammatory accusations. The Civic Party's Alan Leong claimed on TV that the white paper was Beijing's attempt to intimidate Hongkongers.
          
            It's a shame the reporter did not ask him why he thought this. I think he must have believed this is the best way to fan popular resentment toward the central government. But can he be sure no one would find out he has lied about the whole thing?
            
              Before answering this, we need to remember the central government has not changed its standing on, or the definition of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy, since the late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping first promoted it in the 1980s. Whatever the opposition camp and its foreign sponsors say about the policy now is irrelevant. This is because their perception of "One Country, Two Systems" was wrong all along.
              
                It is amusing how the Sinophobes at home and abroad try to convince people the policy should be something it is not. I understand their frustration, but have no sympathy for them. They knew they were wrong, but still went ahead promoting their views. Even worse, they still refuse to accept the truth today. They are trying to twist things to fit their erroneous arguments. This shows how much they hate the real "One Country, Two Systems" policy. We all know where hatred comes from - fear.
                
                  We may never know for sure why they are so scared of the real policy. But Alan Leong did use the word "intimidation" to describe the white paper. It is safe to assume he spoke on behalf of his supporters. Although dishonesty is not uncommon in politics, anyone who is caught lying should be afraid.
                  
                    Another incredible lie about "One Country, Two Systems" came from one of the initiators of the illegal "Occupy Central" movement. This outspoken critic of the central government is Benny Tai. He has managed to fool some young people with his half-truths and lies because of his academic background. He has hoodwinked certain young people into joining the "Occupy Central" campaign with the dangerous idea that it is OK to break the law and trample on other people's rights to pursue your own political agenda. Instead of using facts to argue against the white paper, he accused Beijing of undermining Hong Kong's "high degree of autonomy" by making reference to some "international standard". But again he failed to provide any evidence of this.
                    
                      It is clear now who really is scared of "One Country, Two Systems". But why do they fear it? Why don't the opposition and their Western sponsors just accept Hong Kong is a special administrative region of China and not an independent political entity? Why do they feel compelled to deny the truth and lie instead?
                      
                        The reason is they are convinced their current place in Hong Kong politics is secure - even if they are proved wrong. Under the existing electoral system they may be able to retain a critical minority in the Legislative Council in 2016. This would allow them to continue obstructing the SAR government on a daily basis. As for the city's constitutional development, they only have to make sure it cannot proceed according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions by the NPCSC. Their best weapons in fighting the truth have been lies. They will keep this up as long as they can.
                        
                          This strategy is obviously a huge gamble, but they have to take it because their only hope of success lies in stopping local people hearing the truth. They are betting on the assumption that people are too busy or lazy to check their claims. Also, many people are so brainwashed they side with the opposition for no reason. The philosophy of the opposition camp is that lies are effective when people believe them. So they will keep telling them as long as this strategy works in their favor.
                          
                            The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                            
(HK Edition 06/23/2014 page9)

