



Speaking at different public functions on Sunday, government officials and community leaders urged students to abide by the law during a week-long boycott of classes which begins today (Monday). 
While some radicals are vigorously applauding the class boycotts, the vast majority of people have cautioned the students about staying away from classes. They are concerned that children's involvement in boycotts might severely affect their learning. 
More worrisome is the fact that the political squabbling over universal suffrage has evidently shifted its battleground from the boisterous Legislative Council (LegCo) chamber and rowdy streets, to classrooms. How can young minds concentrate on their pursuit of academic excellence if tempers flare in the ivory towers of learning? Furthermore, if political tussles spill over into every corner of the community, Hong Kong is destined to edge towards an abyss of unimaginable dimensions. 
We may reason that it is the students' legitimate right to protest, assembly and expression. The organizer of these boycotts - the Hong Kong Federation of Students - has staged such protests in the past. The community is responding in diverse ways and with mixed feelings. Common sense tells us students should prioritize their studies, in preparation for promising careers and meaningful lives, rather than getting involved in dangerous, illegal political campaigns such as "Occupy Central". Blind idealism and passionate romantic ideals often lead nowhere. 
Remarks by the commissioner of Correctional Services on Sunday are worth pondering: The authority has not reserved space for potential arrests of those who take part in the planned "civil disobedience" movement, but there is sufficient space to cope with a sudden surge in the number of remand prisoners. 
People should also remain vigilant and avoid being taken advantage of by political forces manipulating the student movement for their own gain. 
Furthermore, class boycotts should be strictly confined to the tertiary level. Though the eagerness and passion of the younger youth for embracing democracy should be appreciated, and they may accomplish what is unusually achievable within the campus, but their social experience is skin-deep. Tertiary students are usually reaching adulthood. One is legally considered to be an adult at the age of 18, this means those in tertiary education have a great deal more freedom, accompanied by more responsibility. They are therefore able to make decisions on their own. 
But for high school students, it is a different story. These minors are still developing - physically, mentally, emotionally and socially. They still clearly fall under the rules and discipline of their school and the supervision of their parents or guardians. Indeed, given these children's susceptibility to outside influence, many parent concern groups have already voiced their objections to the developing class boycotts. Surely there are other ways for these teenagers to participate in social events, but certainly not something as drastic as boycotting classes. 

(HK Edition 09/22/2014 page9)

