



There is nothing surprising about the National People's Congress Standing Committee's (NPCSC) decision. The situation played out as expected - one person, one vote, but within a set of guidelines that require potential candidates for Chief Executive to garner a majority vote from the Nominating Committee. It would have been too naive to hope for either the central government or the "pan-democrats" to change their stance - especially after ultimatums had been delivered - unless either side was willing to revise their bottom line and signal their new flexibility. 
Benny Tai, an initiator of "Occupy Central", admitted in a recent interview that their threat of paralyzing the financial district had failed to influence the central government's decision in the way they would have hoped. The movement's new focus is on "civil awakening" - a trait not lacking in Hong Kong where it is in evidence in greater abundance than many other places. The turnout for the July 1 march and the subsequent Chater Road sit-in, together with the planned actions of students in skipping classes in protest, are testament to that. 
In contrast, Singapore, which is often compared with Hong Kong, has a far lower level of public participation in political movements. Three years ago, Occupy Singapore attempted to engage the public in the democratic process because the city state's leaders were supposedly failing to represent the people who elected them. Although thousands expressed support, no one turned up besides the media and the police. Pragmatism, motivated by a fear of arrest, has confined protests to state-sanctioned situations such as opposition rallies or the Speakers' Corner where citizens can air their views without worrying about persecution. 
Experience has shown that "democracy" is hardly a miracle cure for social problems, as friends from major bastions of Western democracy have often expressed surprise and pleasure at what Hong Kong has to offer when compared with their home countries. Things that I take for granted, such as safety and the efficiency of public transport, are the most often praised. In Hong Kong, a woman can walk home at all hours of the night with little fear of sexual assault or robbery. 



Meanwhile, acts of sexual molestation will almost certainly result in arrest and criminal prosecution, so repeat sexual offenders are rare. Unemployment rates are often linked to crime, and Hong Kong has an unemployment rate of 3.3 percent - about half that of the United Kingdom (6.4 percent) and the United States (6.2 percent). The homeless are visible in Hong Kong, but less so than in the above countries. Beggars are also less aggressive, often content to kneel by the side of busy walkways waiting for donations. While traveling in the United States, I was often warned by well-meaning strangers to avoid meeting the eyes of the panhandlers hanging around on every other corner, for safety reasons. Last year, a woman was fatally stabbed in Hollywood when she refused to pay the beggars she photographed. 
As for transport issues, trains and buses may be crowded, but they run regularly enough to ensure that, short of freak incidents such as power outages or traffic accidents, commuters will reach their destinations at the expected time. Moreover, there are few places Hong Kong's public transport network does not cover, providing ample convenience to the territory's residents. 
The Hong Kong police force has been accused of "police brutality" in its recent methods of dealing with protesters. Yet what passes for "police brutality" here is rather different from what is covered in the media around the world. Just last month, in Missouri, a protest against the fatal shooting of an unarmed black man by a white police officer was accompanied by pictures of police pinning demonstrators face-down on the road and handcuffing them. Even the media was not spared from the use of violence, with gas thrown at them while they were reporting. To make matters worse, some were even arrested after facing verbal abuse and threats from the police. The use of pepper spray to disperse activists, who stormed the electoral reform talk conducted by a central government official, made headlines, but the above mentioned Missouri protests involved the use of tear gas, stun grenades, and rubber bullets, along with armored vehicles to push back the crowds. 
Instead of bemoaning what might have been, it is a good idea to take a step back now and appreciate what Hong Kong already possesses with its freedom of speech, public safety, efficient transport, and a low unemployment rate, among other things which weigh upon the lives of millions of other city dwellers elsewhere. 
The author is a recent Humanities graduate from Singapore. She is now teaching as a visiting fellow at the City University of Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 09/09/2014 page10)

