



For the sake of mere political expediency, both "Occupy Central" initiator Benny Tai and Democratic Party lawmaker Albert Ho have displayed their unhesitating willingness to compromise the city's rule of law by deliberately distorting the concept of what it is. 
In defending "Occupy" protesters who have flouted court injunctions to clear the streets, the two law experts have advocated the idea that citizens were free to deliberately break a law as long as they accepted the legal consequences. 
They are, in effect, encouraging people to take the law into their own hands. If this idea were to take root in the community, it would prove more disastrous to Hong Kong society than "Occupy" itself. It could push the society towards a state of lawlessness, a situation that would inevitably hurt the long-term prosperity and stability of the territory. 
Tai has also claimed that there was no challenge to the rule of law by merely disobeying a civil court order. This is nothing short of an open insult to common sense, let alone to the legal community. 
A direct affront to the rule of law will inevitably result when deliberate defiance of court orders is committed en masse as a combined effort, the Hong Kong Bar Association (HKBA) said in a recent statement. For the same reason, open calls to the public to disobey a court order will also undoubtedly constitute an erosion of the rule of law, added the statement. 
The HKBA statement is, in effect, saying that political causes should not be used as an excuse for disobeying court orders, and political activists who have disregarded court orders are not immune to the charge of contempt of court. 
There is no doubt that Tai and Ho have effectively created their own version of the concept of the rule of law - for their own purposes. But however slyly they have quibbled over their arguments, they simply can't convince the community of their unusual ideas. 
Rather, by deliberately distorting the concept of the rule of law to serve their political endeavors, they have not only denigrated their own political honesty but shattered the aura of the "pan-democrats" who have been carrying out political maneuvers under the guise of democracy. 
Now with the city's rule of law being seriously challenged and threatened, citizens are faced with pressing questions: Are they willing to trade the city's rule of law for political expediency...and is it a good trade-off after all? 

(HK Edition 11/13/2014 page11)

