 



Jasper Tsang, president of the Legislative Council (LegCo), told the press after the Wednesday LegCo session ended - without even beginning its scheduled deliberation on the SAR government's bill for annual budget funding - that the outcome was "extremely regrettable". We feel his frustration and believe the great majority of Hong Kong residents share his feelings as well. 
The Wednesday session was postponed after several calls failed to summon enough LegCo members back to the assembly hall. Another work day went by with the LegCo again failing to do its job - at the public's expense. The reason behind the outrage is that a few ill-motivated lawmakers from the opposition camp launched a filibuster campaign against the government's budget funding bill. 
The filibuster sponsors include Leung Kwok-hung, a.k.a. Long Hair, and fellow radical politician Chan Wai-yip, who boasted publicly after the session ended prematurely that they had been fully prepared to present their filibuster proposals. He said it was not their fault the session could not proceed as scheduled. This is like thieves blaming would-be victims from stopping them committing a break-in. 
Although Tsang was critical of LegCo members who did not show up or left early on Wednesday it is clear the real culprits are the filibuster sponsors. They would have used their ridiculous proposals to block funding for the government's daily operations as well as all policy projects for the new fiscal year. The fact Leung, Chan and their supporters were obviously enjoying their "win" proves again they could not care less about the public interest as long as they score points for their own benefit. 
As Tsang said, it was regrettable many lawmakers decided to stay away. Whether it was because they did not want to go through the insufferable filibuster bills Leung and Chan were set to table, their absence meant another precious day and a lot of taxpayer money was wasted. But this is what the filibuster sponsors wanted. If they had attended the session instead and let everyone see the tricks used by Leung and Chan, then maybe the LegCo president could have used his powers to pull them into line - as he did last year. 
This is just the latest episode of democratically elected legislators using their powers to shame democracy with such selfish acts such as filibustering at the expense of the public, including those who put them in power. It serves as a rude reminder for anyone who still subscribes to the "true democracy" brouhaha: Is this really what democracy is about? 

(HK Edition 05/01/2014 page8)

