 
'At the end of history stands liberal democracy", so proclaim certain respected US political scientists who predict that history will culminate in the Western democratic system - the end product of the evolution of all political systems. Is this where Hong Kong is heading? 
The debate over our political future resembles a 100 flower blossom. There is no unanimity of views among pan-democrats but they do share a common refrain that the electoral process must measure up to "international standards" for genuine, un-screened elections. This begs the question: What exactly are these international standards? 
Liberal democracy is an ideal. Desirable though it may be, few countries in the world have ever attained true liberal democracy. Some are approaching it, such as Sweden and Norway. Many, including China, are striving for it, despite occasional setbacks along the way. Yet others hold themselves up as models of democracy. The leading claimant in this category is the US, which commands a global following that is both large and loyal, including here in Hong Kong. The Americans have been aggressively peddling their own brand since the end of World War II. 
But the American claim to political and moral superiority must not stand unchallenged. For all the democratic ideals it brandishes, all is not what it seems. The US invaded Iraq on false pretenses, manufacturing evidence of weapons of mass destruction and manipulating public opinion to justify an unjust invasion. At the time former president George W. Bush bragged that Iraq would be turned into a shining example of democracy in the Middle East. Instead, 11 years and half a million invasion-related Iraqi deaths later the Middle East is in tatters while the death toll mounts daily. 



Had the US adopted a genuine "one person one vote" system for the election of their president, as Hong Kong will be doing in 2017 for the election of our Chief Executive, Bush would not even have made it to the White House. Bush lost the popular vote in the election, with Al Gore securing 540,000 more votes than Bush did. But Bush became the president because he got five more votes in the "Electoral College". This made a winner of the man who under a strictly one-person-one-vote electoral format would have been a loser. So much for supposedly democratic electoral principles. 
Closely related to the idea of liberal democracy is the concept of social justice. Back in 1776, the US Declaration of Independence nobly declared that "all men are born equal". But African Americans had to wait until 1962 - 186 years later - for the first African American student to be admitted into a racially segregated university. Even today, African Americans are still subjected to discrimination, both blatant and latent, despite Barack Obama having elected the first African American president. History tells us that social justice, much like democracy, takes time to take root. 
As a Special Administrative Region with a unique "One Country, Two Systems" arrangement, Hong Kong is a 17-year-old fledgling political entity. It demonstrates youthful impatience for a quick fix - the surgically implanted democratic ideal. We must know that there is no universal democratic model we can easily slip into. Each place has to adapt itself to its own distinctive socio-political context. There is the Thai brand, the Indian brand and, while skeptics may snicker, there is the budding Chinese brand of socialist democracy with Chinese characteristics. 
Is the China model working? In the 36 years since Deng Xiaoping opened up the country in 1978, China has experienced an economic miracle, almost closing the economic gap with the US, and the World Bank predicting that the Chinese economy will overtake the American economy later this year. As half a billion Chinese are lifted out of poverty, people are beginning to wonder if there might be more than one way of reaching the political Holy Grail. 
The opposition and pro-establishment camps are poles apart over our political future. We are heading for a stalemate, even as we agree that the status quo is unacceptable. We should perhaps listen to saner voices: Both the Hong Kong Bar Association and the Law Society, stout defenders of liberal tradition, have declared that the Basic Law rules out any form of public nomination for the election of the Chief Executive. Whatever our political preferences or proposals, they must conform to the mini-constitution that governs our city. Haven't we always championed the supremacy of the rule of law? 
Let us eke out what we can in our pursuit of true liberal democratic ideals. Gradualism is not a dirty word, nor is politics the art of the impossible. We believe in plurality. We should for once think rational and local. This is no time to think American. Building on a Basic Law-compliant, non-public nomination election model, we can no doubt come up with a system that befits Hong Kong as the world's freest economy and enables the people to elect a Chief Executive who loves Hong Kong and the country. 
As political scientists look on at history's finishing line, they will find the mainland and Hong Kong among those who triumphantly cross it. 
The author teaches at the School of Journalism and Communication at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 07/17/2014 page9)

