
The "Occupy Central" moment has ended, but we are left with more questions than answers. If we look around the world, radical politics, especially among the younger generation, is quite common. So-called identity politics is also spreading globally at a fast rate. These intra-national trends are unfolding alongside the "re-politicization" of international relations and global politics. From Russia to the Middle East, tensions are clearly rising. There is a desperate need for us to make sense of the new realities we are facing. 
The transition from "consensus politics" to "identity politics" is a significant development which needs to be explained. Consensus politics is both procedural and substantial. It is about deliberation and compromise. We used to understand it as the most democratic form of government - or to use a popular slogan "ultimate democracy". 
Identity politics, on the other hand, suggests a very different view of democracy and social organizations. Our activists, political scientists and commentators are telling us we now have "identity politics" and "identity" is very significant. This is not at all enlightening. What we really want to know is why and why now? Identity, both as a concept and as an organizing principle of society, has been around for hundreds of years. In a sense, identities are at their weakest in today's post-modern world. Unlike in past feudal societies, we all have multiple identities - and they are very fluid. It is debatable that it is a fear of losing our identities, precisely because they are so fragile, that makes us hold onto them so much. Here, people are faced with a dilemma. They do not really want to invest too much into any given identity. We have seen this before and it can be suffocating.



The key difference between consensus and identity politics is negotiability. Consensus is about compromise, but identities cannot be compromised. In an earlier view of democracy, one social group can have more votes or fewer votes. This will be translated into more or fewer seats in the legislative and executive bodies. The tax rate can be increased a few percentage points, or reduced. The minimum wage level can be higher, or not too high. Unfortunately, identity-based claims are seldom negotiable. "Hongkongness" is an all-or-nothing concept. 
Take a look at how the radicals are using the term "citizen". The term no longer signifies the idea of where people with different ideas and interests come together to deliberate and negotiate. It is now a metaphor for exclusion: Those who are "with them" are "citizens"; those who are not are "Hong Kong pigs" - their enemies. In this context our radicals often claim they represent Hong Kong citizens. They really mean this. 
Consensus does not mean a state where everyone is equally happy. But it is important there is something in it for everyone - that everyone has something to be happy about. This state of affairs was possible for a selected number of "developed" countries when the US-led global capitalist system was on the rise. When the pie was growing, everyone could have a bigger slice of it and a "consensus" was more easily reached. When the pie ceases to grow as fast, as in the case of Japan, Taiwan, Hong Kong and even the US today, one group's slice grows at the expense of the others. Politics becomes more contentious, and people use their identities to secure their claims and to exclude those of other people. 
There is a parallel but larger process going on if we look beyond the national borders and that is the decline of US hegemony and the resulting "re-politicization" of international relations and global politics. The US recipe for modernity has failed to deliver the results as promised. Japan, Taiwan and Hong Kong - some of America's best disciples - have all achieved astonishing prosperity, but social and economic developments in these regions have proved unsustainable. Wealth gaps are large and widening, and electoral politics is constantly dysfunctional. If we look at less-fortunate students of US beliefs: Thailand, the Philippines, and Ukraine, for example, the results are depressing. 
The point is, we cannot address identity politics on its own terms. We cannot fight identities with identities. This would be futile. The exclusive politics that we are now witnessing is a manifestation of a shifting global order. The faster a new global order is established, the earlier we end our petty, self-defeating identity politics at home. The real question, therefore, is: What is Hong Kong's role, or more to the point, China's in establishing this new world order? 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 




(HK Edition 12/30/2014 page10)

