



Former legislator Audrey Eu argued in a recent column that "equal rights are not the same as dividing up the pie". She praises young people for their zeal for justice on the grounds that close to 60 percent of respondents polled by the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU) did not agree to the motion of ending "Occupy Central". She reprimands the over 60s for their presumed greed - alleging that they prefer fame and money over justice, since 98.1 percent of them wanted to end "Occupy". Eu's argument is unfortunately both biased and unfounded. 
Of course she is right in saying that equal rights are not the same as dividing up the pie. But what Hong Kong people want is more substantive equal rights than formal equal nomination rights. The best safeguard for substantive equal rights is upholding the rule of law. When people's substantive rights are arbitrarily trampled upon, and when even legislators think that arbitrarily deviating from the law is acceptable, there cannot be substantive equal rights. When protesters dictate that other people cannot use certain roads as they wish, and when those who object to "Occupy" must yield to the dictates of the protesters, how can those protesters claim to stand for democracy and equal rights for all? 
In October last year I was invited to speak at a forum at the City University of Hong Kong (CityU) by the Civic Party. The theme was "Nothing to Fear about Public Nomination." I made the point that the main objection against public nomination was simply that it deviated from the Basic Law. I tried to convince those present that we should try to seek the lowest threshold of nomination possible under the existing legal constraints. I was booed by the audience. Even today I still cannot understand how in a civilized society like Hong Kong there can still be such contempt for the law. 
I have the following 10 questions to ask Audrey Eu and the protesters: 
1. Do you truly believe in equality for all? 
2. Does anyone have the right and freedom to occupy any section of the road at will in order to lobby for one's own visionary ideal society? 
3. If one could indeed block roads in lobbying for one's visionary ideal society, shouldn't such a decision be reached through a process that complied with standards of procedural justice that regarded all members of society as equals? 
4. Was such a process followed and the appropriate authorization obtained from the public before "Occupy" was launched? 
5. Do you, the protesters, really believe that everybody should be equal before the law? 
6. Do you agree that anyone who contravenes the law should suffer the appropriate legal consequences for doing so? 
7. Are you willing to face the legal consequences of your illegal actions? 
8. Have you ever put yourselves in the position of others, and considered that "Occupy" has caused tremendous inconvenience, even suffering, for young and old alike who must spend longer time traveling to and from their medical appointments or schools. And do you know, or even care, that many small and medium-sized enterprises located near barricaded roads are struggling, and that the incomes of tens of thousands of professional drivers have fallen, causing much hardship? 
9. Have you considered Beijing's concerns about national security and how they can be addressed? 
10. Do you agree that without the rule of law there cannot be genuine democracy? 
I would ask Audrey to recall her accusation that the over 60s care more for money and fame than for justice. This accusation is totally unfounded. I understand that PolyU's polling team used the randomized dialing method to reach respondents. These respondents cannot in any way be presumed to be vested-interest groups. 
According to the Hong Kong Council of Social Service (HKCSS), close to a third of those aged over 65 are classified as poor - defined as having income at parity with or lower than one-half of the median income. It can be said that the elderly who were polled are more experienced in life and that they consider personal freedoms and the protection of rights under the rule of law to be more important than equal nomination rights. 
I have no objection to including political content in liberal studies at all. But I object strongly when political propaganda is spread in the name of education. Democracy should be concerned more with substantive justice than public nomination. 
The author is director of the Centre for Public Policy Studies at Lingnan University. 

(HK Edition 11/11/2014 page10)

