 
Former chief secretary Anson Chan has been very busy recently. Right before her tour to the United States with Martin Lee, she tabled a political reform proposal that was seen as more acceptable to both the dissidents and the establishment. Her proposal dispensed with the highly contentious element of civil nomination which some radical dissidents consider indispensable but which the establishment finds incompatible with the Basic Law. Instead, she suggested creating a 1,400-strong Nominating Committee with 317 members directly elected by all 3 million voters. In her plan, anyone who can secure nomination from a 10th of the committee members would be qualified as candidates for the 2017 Chief Executive Election. 
The moderate dissidents welcome Chan's blueprint, as it is almost certain they can secure the necessary support. Their political strength means that they do not need a "civil nomination" to get a few of their members nominated, as long as the votes they need from the Nominating Committee is not prohibitively high. On the other hand, the radical dissidents have no chance getting into the race through the committee, and therefore they must insist on other means of nomination. 
In short, the debate on so-called "genuine democracy" is about nothing but who will benefit more from the arrangement. 



At the moment, the radical dissidents have hijacked the moderates. The moderates feel they have no choice but to pretend that they also insist on civil nomination. Anson Chan's proposal now provides an opportunity for them to climb down from their high horses and loosen up their demands - an opportunity they should exploit during the upcoming Shanghai trip. 
Chan's proposal would have been more sincere, if not for the fact that she went on her two-week tour to the US and Canada with Martin Lee. During the tour, the two visited controversial organizations in North America and spread inaccurate information about the implementation of "One Country, Two Systems" as well as pending political reform in Hong Kong. 
For example, Chan and Lee visited the National Endowment for Democracy (NED), which is notorious for sponsoring subversive activities around the world. Allen Weinstein, who helped draft the legislation establishing the NED, was quite candid when he said in 1991 "a lot of what we do today was done covertly 25 years ago by the CIA." In effect, the CIA has been laundering money through the NED. In 2005, then US congressman Ron Paul argued against funding the NED as he thought it has "very little to do with democracy", and is in fact "an organization that uses US tax money to actually subvert democracy, by showering funding on favored political parties or movements overseas." 
The climax of Chan and Lee's North American tour was their meeting with US Vice-President Joe Biden in the White House on April 4. According to White House officials, Biden's appearance at the White House meeting was not "part of his public schedule", but he "stopped by" to reiterate the US's "long-standing support for democracy in Hong Kong and for the city's high degree of autonomy under the 'One Country, Two Systems' framework". 



Chan and Lee took the opportunity to voice concern over press freedom, implying to Biden that Beijing was somehow responsible for the knife attack on former Ming Pao editor-in-chief Kevin Lau Chun-to. 
What is funny is that Chan is trying to play "good cop/bad cop" all by herself. On the one hand, she is putting forward one of the most moderate proposals among the dissidents; on the other hand, she is sending us the signal that if she does not prevail, her US friends will be knocking on our door. 
It is unclear what gives Chan and Lee the impression that this high-handed approach will work. But some dissidents seem to believe inviting external forces to interfere with our city's internal affairs is conducive to achieving "genuine democracy" in the forthcoming political reform. They are wrong. The central government and the Chinese people will not tolerate such behavior. In fact, these maneuvers might well be counter-productive, creating even more distrust between the central government and the dissidents. 
If our dissident lawmakers want to achieve results in Shanghai, they must not make the same kind of mistakes. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 04/08/2014 page9)

