



Protesters turned to singing and chanting late on Tuesday as they continued their blockade of downtown thoroughfares in key parts of Hong Kong Island. 
But political scientists warned that opposition leaders would be unable to control the situation and public tolerance might reach a tipping point next week. 
The outpouring of activist sentiment was ignited by student protesters who stormed the forecourt of the Central Government Complex at Tamar on Friday evening. Sunday's clashes apparently fueled a further expansion of the road blockades. 
The Friday rally was co-organized by the Hong Kong Federation of Students. The assembly on Sunday was also labeled as a launch of the "Occupy Central" campaign. The two groups have since told the media their goals and deadlines for the campaign. 
But City University of Hong Kong political scientist James Sung Lap-kung said neither group was in control of the protests. This was made apparent by Tuesday's incidents. 
A public bus trapped at Admiralty managed to drive through the massive crowd on Tuesday morning, but a similar request by a vehicle at Mong Kok was denied by the protesters there. The latter group also refused partial removal of barricades for the access of emergency vehicles. 
Sung said the expectations of many protesters on the design of democracy could be vastly different. Without effective leadership, their feelings could become radicalized. Things could then quickly spiral out of control. 
Sung said that even if opposition leaders have been in communication with the establishment to resolve various issues, the outlook remains gloomy. This is because major opposition parties have largely become irrelevant in the past few days. 
Chinese University political analyst Ma Ngok agreed. 
Ma said neither the student union, nor any established institution, would be able to encourage the protesters to leave. He believes getting people to abandon their protests will hinge on difficult choices faced by leaders in the central and local governments. 
As of Monday the central government authorities, and other pro-establishment figures, have made it clear that the election rules decided by the National People's Congress Standing Committee were "unshakeable". Protesters' demands to reverse this decision are impractical, they say. 
Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying, who has been assured of Beijing's support, told the public on Tuesday that the deadlock could last for a week. Both political analysts expected the protesters to face the real test of their perseverance and tolerance of others. 
Ma said the back-to-back public holidays would help boost attendance at street rallies and ease the impatience of road users. Turnout would drop from next week - a full working week - but he warned that new attempts by police to disperse the protesters might backfire. 
Sung was more concerned about potentially declining societal tolerance for "Occupy". A driver was arrested on Tuesday for driving into a protesting crowd in Mong Kok, while eggs dropped from a height almost hit activists at a Causeway Bay sit-in later on Tuesday. 
Considering the declining public support for the protests, Sung was wary of a rumored plan to lay siege to government premises. "No side should let the protest grow further. We may descend into anarchy - it's very dangerous," said Sung. 
kahon@chinadailyhk.com 
(HK Edition 10/01/2014 page1)

