



The Hong Kong Federation of Students and Scholarism still believe they can determine the development of the illegal "Occupy" movement. On Saturday they announced they would assemble in Admiralty on Sunday night and attempt to re-block access to the government headquarters. 
Scholarism told their followers to bring "full protective gear", apparently in anticipation of violence during the "escalation of protests" that they have called for. As close to a "call to arms" as possible in Hong Kong, this could lead to tragedy. Hence we strongly condemn these two groups' decision to endanger protesters in this way. 
The illegal campaign has been infiltrated by people of shady provenance and ulterior motives, as evidenced during the violent clashes between radical protesters and police in Mong Kok during street clearance operations in line with High Court injunctions last week. 
If it can happen in Mong Kok, there is every reason to suspect it may happen elsewhere - particularly after last month's violent attack on the Legislative Council (LegCo) building. 
Now that the student groups have openly called for an escalation of their action, it is only logical for local residents and authorities to expect further violent behavior. 
That is why the SAR government and Hong Kong Police Force have urged people not to join the illegal gathering or approach the vicinity of the "Occupy" sites, for their own safety. 
A police spokesman, addressing the press at a routine briefing on Saturday, reiterated the law enforcement department's commitment to protecting public safety against all attempts to undermine the stability of the city and the rule of law. 
Thousands of police officers were deployed in the vicinity of the Admiralty and Mong Kok "Occupy" sites in expectation of violent behavior by occupiers bent on escalating an already tense situation. 
It is obvious that radical groups are intent on provoking the police with their violent confrontations. This is so they can later charge that the authorities used "excessive force" and win public sympathy for their unconstitutional demands and illegal acts. They will do this by putting their followers' lives in immediate danger and their futures in jeopardy. 
It is now clearer than ever that the masterminds and organizers of the "Occupy" campaign care nothing for the overall interests of Hong Kong society or the well-being of local residents. They are only interested in seizing governance of Hong Kong and turning the city into a forward base for Western powers seeking to "contain" China for their own "national interests". 
Evidently they have no qualms in using the pretext of "true democracy" or "universal suffrage" while sacrificing Hong Kong and using the youth as cannon fodder to achieve their "strategic objectives" in this part of the world. 
Let them win and Hong Kong will be ruined. So we must not let them win. 

(HK Edition 12/01/2014 page9)

