 
Upon examining Article 45(2) of the Basic Law, two different interpretations are possible: One is that the selection of the Chief Executive (CE) by universal suffrage in 2017 is the ultimate goal - without any possibility for further change. The other is the opposite interpretation that the method for selecting the CE will continue to move forward from 2017 in response to the conditions in Hong Kong at that time. It will develop in a gradual and orderly way once universal suffrage for electing the CE in 2017 has finally been achieved. 
I believe that the former interpretation is incorrect and the latter correct for the following reasons: 
First, when interpreting the Basic Law, it is appropriate to adopt a systematic approach - rather than a purely literal one. For example, of the two statements in Article 45(2), the first one clearly asserts that the method for selecting the CE should develop in regard to the actual situation of the SAR at that time, and in a gradual, orderly manner. The second stresses that the ultimate aim is selection of the CE by universal suffrage. If both statements are expressed in a systematic, purposeful manner the principles mentioned in the first should also apply to methods for selecting the CE before and after universal suffrage has been achieved. It would be wrong to suggest the method for selecting the CE will remain unchanged once universal suffrage is introduced in 2017. 
Second, when examining the development of Western democracy, it is evident that the systems of many capitalist countries did not stop refining their political systems once universal suffrage had been achieved. It is wrong to assume the democratic development of Hong Kong will cease in 2017. 



It is interesting to study what happened in the United Kingdom. The UK achieved universal suffrage for everyone over the age of 21 to choose their representative for the House of Commons in 1948. In 1969, the minimum age requirement for voters was lowered to 18 years old. But the process of reducing the number of appointed members of the upper chamber of parliament has been quite slow. Britain still has a hereditary head of state: the Queen. The prime minister is chosen by the ruling party and not elected by universal suffrage. So things do change over time - but often, they change slowly. 
In the United States the president is selected by 538 members of the Electoral College, rather than by direct election through universal suffrage. Universal suffrage for Congress was extended to Caucasian male voters over the age of 21 years in 1868 and for the Senate in 1932. Such rights were conferred upon female voters in 1920; and to all citizens in 1962; those who were illiterate were permitted to vote from 1965. The age requirement for all voters was finally lowered to 18 in 1971. 
It is also necessary to realize that no political system or electoral mechanism is perfect. It is not possible to establish a flawless system for electing the CE by universal suffrage, which will please everybody. 
We would be wise to adopt something imperfect, but one which can be refined and improved at a later date. It is foolish to reject good, workable arrangements merely because we perceive them to have some initial failings. 
If there are those who take the opposite approach to this and oppose universal suffrage for the election of the CE in 2017 simply because the new system is imperfect, this could be disastrous for Hong Kong. There are potentially two major consequences: 
First, universal suffrage for electing members of the LegCo is deferred. We should remember the National People's Congress Standing Committee's (NPCSC) decision on Dec 29, 2007 which said, "After the CE is selected by universal suffrage, the election of the LegCo of the HKSAR may be implemented by the method of electing all the members by universal suffrage." This could mean universal suffrage for all members of LegCo can only be achieved after CE universal suffrage has been attained. If CE universal suffrage is delayed then universal suffrage elections for LegCo may also be delayed. 
Second, a new timetable for implementing universal suffrage would be needed. This will delay the process of implementing universal suffrage because the CE would have to prepare a report on the political situation in Hong Kong for the NPCSC. The NPCSC would then have to make a final decision on a new timetable for reform. 
This therefore reinforces the importance of being realistic, rational and wise in the implementation of political reform in Hong Kong. 
The author is a leading commentator on constitutional and legal affairs. 

(HK Edition 08/11/2014 page9)

