 
Hong Kong is experiencing a period of political upheaval as the "Occupy Central" campaign and July 1 protest march continues to grab the headlines. 
Currently there are two main demands by the opposition camp. One is "public nomination" in the Chief Executive election by universal suffrage and the other is "true democracy" or "compliance with international standards". But the problem is no one seems able to define "true democracy" or "international standards". Neither has anyone explained, with real-life examples, to what these terms refer. If someone says the United States is a "true democracy", then why is the American public so disillusioned with their electoral system? 
"Public nomination" appears to be the main goal of all opposition members. They make it look like the most important objective above all else, but will it really benefit them? 
Remember the US presidential election in late 2000? Florida was the last state to announce the voting results, which was to determine whether George W. Bush or Al Gore would become the 43rd president of the country. The final tally put Bush ahead of Gore by 537 votes, quite the opposite of what the opinion polls had shown before election day. The governor of Florida at the time was Bush's brother Jeb Bush, something which did not help solve the technical issues arising from the design flaws of the ballots. Some called for a second round of votes but neither Bush nor Gore agreed. They instead sought a court decision. It was somewhat puzzling that Gore rejected the proposal for a "rematch" despite his apparent advantage in terms of the popular support, but was it really? Gore must have known there was no guarantee that the second vote would resolve things. Setting a precedent for a second vote would no doubt have opened up a Pandora's Box, making American society more unstable and future elections more difficult. 
This significant example illustrates a key principle of Western politics: Avoid things that will undermine social stability, because chaos will hurt society. One of the proposed constitutional reform plans we have seen requires multiple rounds of voting to select the Chief Executive. That is a terrible idea and would ruin the candidates' political careers as well as public confidence in democracy. 



"Public nomination" sounds fair but in reality it is not. Why? 
First of all, it is problematic verifying the eligibility of nominators. The safest way to do this would be for the government to handle the nominating process by checking each voter's ID before their nominating vote was cast. The problem with this kind of nomination is somewhat different from normal elections. Some nominees' fates would already have been determined before the election. 
One common practice is for voters to sign a "joint nominating letter", such as in Taiwan, where the minimum number of signatures is 258,000 for each nominee. It was reported that James Soong, founder and chairman of the People First Party, was already having problems collecting this number of voter signatures. In Hong Kong the minimum number of nominators would likely be 100,000. Even if the number were lower it would still be a significant hurdle for many hopefuls. How can anyone call this "true democracy" or "genuine universal suffrage"? Besides, who could guarantee there would be no cheating during the nominating process? As soon as someone is caught cheating the person he or she nominated may lose an opportunity to compete in the election. Some legitimate voters will decide against signing "joint nomination letters" for fear of getting involved in a vote-rigging scandal which could lead to court action. These scenarios are called "technical unfairness". 
Then there is the possibility of unfairness in the election process. For example, at least two rounds of voting are needed if there are 100 nominees, 98 of them would be eliminated in the first round, leaving the two candidates with the most votes to compete in the second round of voting. Whoever gets more votes than the others becomes CE. Could the opposition be sure their candidate(s) would be in the last two or one chosen? If all 100 candidates fought it out in one round of voting, someone could quite possibly win the CE election with less than 10 percent of legitimate votes. How popular would such a CE be? This is anybody's guess. It may be necessary to hold a third or even fourth round of voting so as to ensure the winner gains wider acceptance. This process could drag on for several months. I seriously doubt any Hong Kong citizen would want this to happen. 
In virtually all previous legislative elections an interesting scenario was observed, in which the opposition won 60 percent of the votes, but only 40 percent of the seats in the Legislative Council. The opposition camp has insisted it was because the pro-establishment camp was good at vote assignment (to improve each candidate's chances of winning against their opposite number in the opposition parties). But this sounds like a loser's excuse. They cannot explain why the opposition has not learned to do the same thing after so many years. If they cannot work out the root of their problems they will never be mature enough to break the "4/6" curse. 
Today the situation may be reversed, in that the opposition have given people the impression they have 60 percent of public support, but may only obtain 40 percent of the popular vote. The reason will probably be that they were misled by the mass protest march of July 1 and the high turnout of the "Occupy Central referendum" in late June. They wrongly believe they have majority support. However, when legal responsibilities in the constitutional exercise of elections come into play, things will be completely different. Many people will take their voting responsibility seriously as opposed to how they regarded the protest marches and mock "referendum". This will result in decisions which are the opposite of what the opposition expects. 
Funding is another key element in democratic elections. For example, the deposit needed to join Taiwan's primary election has increased to NT$15 million ($500,000). Candidates stand to lose this deposit should they fail to enter or complete the process. Even if candidates are able to meet the cost of the deposit, there are higher sums involved in campaign costs. "Public nomination" is bound to result in a glut of candidates. The best way to avoid this is to stop most of them with elevated campaign costs. Candidates have to raise much of their campaign funding themselves - invariably relying heavily on donors. That is how Western democracy works and Hong Kong is no exception. It is clear who has the better relationship with the business community in Hong Kong - the pro-establishment camp - not the opposition camp. 
That is why in most Western countries, "public nomination" does not play a role in national elections. Some Western nations may allow this kind of nomination but it usually remains a phrase in election law because of the hurdles involved in achieving it. 
A Nominating Committee is the best way to resolve these problems. 
The opposition members stand just as much chance of being nominated by the Nominating Committee, as they do by "public nomination", if not more so. The existing Election Committee (EC) is dominated by representatives of the business community, which is why the Nominating Committee formed with the EC as a reference, must be more representative to fit its democratic billing. 
The white paper on the "One Country, Two Systems" policy, published by the State Council last month, contains two telltale comments: "The democratic quality of the CE election has been growing"; and "the ratio of directly elected LegCo members has grown over the years." The hidden message here is that, once the precedence is set, membership of the future Nominating Committee can be discussed by all parties concerned. Opposition parties have proposed numerous methods of selecting the CE in 2017 and one of them has attracted considerable attention with an expanded Nominating Committee. 
Discussion over the composition of the Nominating Committee is the genuine stage for meaningful action in Hong Kong's constitutional development, not the streets of Central. Politicians should be capable of all-round strategic thinking, have realistic goals, and the ability to inspire the support of the people instead of following every whim and fancy of the public. 
The author is a senior journalist. 

(HK Edition 07/21/2014 page9)

