
As I am writing this column, High Court injunction orders are being enforced in Hong Kong to remove the barricades in key streets, which have inconvenienced businesses and residents for over 50 days. The majority of citizens want to see Hong Kong restored to normal as soon as possible. 
Unfortunately, I believe that for three reasons it will take much courage and careful management before Hong Kong reverts to the peaceful, friendly city it was before. My personal assessment of the situation is based on: first, "pan-democrat" activists' refusal to accept the political reality; second, protesters being infiltrated by provocateurs determined to turn protest into violent confrontation; and third, the longer the protests continue, the more the erosion of the rule of law will cause lasting damage to the governance of the city. 
Leaders of "Occupy Central" movement were unable to stop the occupation. They have disappeared from the scene altogether without taking any legal responsibility for their actions. So it was left to leaders of the Hong Kong Federation of Students to ponder what to do next. 
Actions by student leaders in the last few weeks have demonstrated that while they are happy to bask in the media limelight, they might not (or refuse to) understand the political reality. They don't know how to end the current impasse that has caused deep conflicts among local citizens. They are misinformed and incited by "pan-democratic" activists and legislators who do not want to participate in consultations over constitutional change. They also demand the inclusion of the unconstitutional "public nomination" for candidates for the role of the next Chief Executive. Therefore, dialogue will be futile. 
From the beginning of the protests the world has witnessed the Hong Kong government's strict adherence to the laws allowing citizens the right to protest. If similar protests occurred in the United Kingdom, the protesters would have already been dispersed, arrested, prosecuted and jailed weeks ago. Last month, when demonstrators turned up to occupy Parliament Green in London, they were immediately dispersed. Law and order must be respected and observed at all times. 



The professionalism of the Hong Kong Police Force is commendable. During the last seven weeks, the "Occupy" campaign descended into chaos. It was fragmented and unprincipled as student leaders drifted in all directions. The only organized part of it, I would say, was the continuous and endless supply of provisions from unknown sources into protest sites. 
People of dubious backgrounds and motivations have associated with the students. They have hijacked the campaign causing conflict and anarchy. The police are trying hard to maintain law and order under very difficult circumstances. "Occupy" has become a farce resulting in shouting matches, fights and heightened tensions between occupiers and their opponents. 
Many of these people continue with the protests either to cause more violent clashes or to await the police clearance. This is so they can proclaim themselves to be "pro-democracy heroes". 
Patience is a virtue, so the saying goes. Hong Kong's government and police have shown commendable patience during the last seven weeks. The rule of law has been the cornerstone of Hong Kong's success in the past. Its erosion would be detrimental to its continuing stability and prosperity. No one is above the law and only its strict observance to the law will deliver the governance that Hong Kong's citizens deserve. 
Departure from the "One Country, Two Systems" principle and the nomination procedures, as established in the Basic Law, has been disastrous. "Pan-democrat" campaigners have created their own rules and procedures. They have not observed the existing legal and constitutional framework, which governs Hong Kong. Not only have they failed to understand political realities, they have also abandoned the principle that "changes in Hong Kong should be gradual and appropriate to the local situation". This is a view supported by the majority. 
What Hong Kong needs now is a quick return to normality. It needs to uphold the rule of law and enter the next stage of consultation for constitutional change to deliver universal suffrage in 2017. With businesses ruined by the occupation and deep divisions among people, the healing process will take time. Government alone cannot achieve these goals. Businesses, civic leaders and citizens need to work together. 
It is essential to examine better ways of informing people of their rights, the importance of the rule of law, good citizenship and a better understanding of governance. 
The author is director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for more than 10 years. 

(HK Edition 11/24/2014 page7)

