 
Five days before the close of the public consultation period, the Hong Kong Bar Association (HKBA) responded to the Consultation Document on the Methods for Selecting the Chief Executive in 2017 and for Forming the Legislative Council in 2016. Among more than 36,000 proposals received by the government, the HKBA's opinions are perhaps the most lengthy and controversial. 
They are lengthy because the submission was 44 pages with 14 pages of appendices. They are controversial for their coverage of the most contentious legal and political issues in regard to Hong Kong's future constitutional development. Of all the HKBA's points, about half will be condemned by the opposition camp and welcomed by the pro-establishment camp. The rest will be criticized by the pro-establishment camp, but applauded by the opposition. 
For example, the HKBA believes that explicit language of Article 45(2) of the Basic Law does not envisage nomination other than by Nominating Committee. It rules out a Nominating Committee consisting of all of the electorate or each and every registered voter. This is because it would make the requirement that the Nominating Committee be "broadly representative" ineffective. (Para 49-50) It further comments that the common law principle that "everything is permitted except what is expressly forbidden" can apply in private law, and will be inappropriate if applied to public law. (Para 52(b)) As a result of this reasoning, so-called civic nomination and party nomination are regarded as violating the Basic Law. I support these views - although the initiators of civic nomination and of party nomination may not. 
Another example concerns "democratic procedures". It appears to me that the HKBA has separated the phrase "democratic procedures" into "democracy" and "procedures" first and then joined them together. Because the word "democracy" in regard to elections implies "participatory" procedures, the HKBA interprets "democratic procedures" as "participatory" procedures (Para 66-67). The demand for "plurality" refers not only to numerical plurality but more importantly to political plurality. (Para 69(a)) Therefore, the HKBA rejects the very low threshold amounting to de facto automatic nominations and the simple majority to veto such applicants. (Para 70) So the DAB's proposal, that a potential candidate must secure majority support from the Nominating Committee to become a candidate, is rejected. 



The DAB's proposal needs further study and modifications as I noted in a previous column. 
But I have reservations about other arguments by the HKBA. Firstly, that "democratic procedures" should be read in the nomination context and be inseparable, and that "majority support" should mean "democratic procedures" in regard to the nomination process. 
As we all know, the Basic Law was enacted in April, 1990, while the first election of the Legislative Council by geographical constituencies was conducted in Hong Kong in 1991. This was a time when the political parties were in their infancy. It was impossible for the drafters of the Basic Law to envisage what Hong Kong would like today with its divisions into pro-establishment and opposition camps. Nor could they have imagined who would be in future selection, election or nominating committees. Therefore, we cannot say for sure that "democratic procedure" as mentioned in Article 45(2) was intended to mean "majority support". 
Secondly, the principle of free elections by universal suffrage as mentioned in Article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) might not be applicable to Hong Kong in regard to CE's elections by universal suffrage. In the ICCPR, the subject person who enjoys universal suffrage is a citizen, as opposed to a permanent resident in Hong Kong, as stipulated in Article 26 of the Basic Law. No doubt all citizens should swear allegiance to their own countries without exceptions, whereas permanent residents of Hong Kong cannot be made to do so, because some of them are not Chinese nationals. Therefore, constitutional development in Hong Kong has to follow the Basic Law, rather than the ICCPR. 
Even if the ICCPR could be applied to Hong Kong, its application would still be subject to ratification by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC). Article 39(1) of the Basic Law states that the provisions of ICCPR as applied to Hong Kong should remain in force and be implemented through the laws of the HKSAR. It did not have any earlier application because all Hong Kong's governors before 1997 were simply appointed by the British government. This was done without any consultation or local elections. 
Furthermore, certain principles of universal suffrage as stated in ICCPR cannot be extended to the nomination process. Various practices of Western democracy do not conform to the ICCPR either. For example, the nomination of the French prime minister by French President, without any public participation, contravenes the ICCPR. 
The author is a HK commentator and professor at the Research Center of Hong Kong and Macao Basic Law, Shenzhen University. 

(HK Edition 05/05/2014 page9)

