 




Local residents vote on issues that matter to their community.
 
Lu Zhaofang never thought the shabby residential area of Siming district in Xiamen could one day become his new home for life and leisure.
But Jiuzhuxiang, one of the oldest residential areas in Zhenhai community, has undergone great changes and been renamed the “Golden Dream Residence”.
“Those changes are not only about house renovation or infrastructure, but also remarkable details made in our living environment,” said the 75-year-old, who has lived in the area for more than 25 years.
“In less than one year, we could no longer see scenes such as derelict grounds, potholed roads, dirty walls or garbage sites.
“They have been replaced by sport facilities, flowers and trees, delicate balconies and cultural corridors, ” said Lu.
Han Xinwei, a resident in the neighboring Ruiquan Resort in the community, said she also feels comfortable in her new environment.
“With surveillance cameras in every corner, our community reported zero robbery cases recently.
“More importantly, the chaos of private cars has been tackled thanks to more than 35 new parking lots,” she said.
The improvements in Jiuzhuxiang and Ruiquan are two examples of the “Beautiful Xiamen” project begun last June.
The project aims to build Xiamen into a modern and livable city with natural beauty and cultural charms. “The initiative to renovate the Zhenhai community is in line with the core of the project, which is to create a better life for local residents,” said Su Jiangzhen, Party secretary of the community.
Built in 1980s, the community is home to more than 300 households. More than 80 percent of the buildings have had no property management for many years.
“So we established a self-management system under which residents are entitled to select their own representatives who are responsible for making decisions, supervision and negotiations,” he said.
Su said that democracy and communication play a vital part in advancing the renovation in the community.
“At the beginning, it is difficult to make everyone satisfied with the changes. To get everyone involved, we use surveys and micro blogs to listen voices from all sides,” said Su.
wangjinhui@chinadaily.com.cn
 
