
Surveys show that most of our younger generation support "true universal suffrage". On every university campus, the banner "I want true universal suffrage" can be seen. While I am delighted to see young people concerned about social justice, I am disappointed by their lack of critical thinking. This is notwithstanding the requirements for Liberal Studies in the DSE. 
Unfortunately while the phrase "critical thinking" is on everybody's lips, and is the subject of a frequently offered university course, few really know what it is all about. Many apparently believe that criticizing others is critical thinking. But thoughtless and even rude criticism of other people, is the very opposite of critical thinking. Critical thinking is more about being humble and self-critical than being critical of others. The first lesson of critical thinking is that one must be self-critical before one can criticize other people. Jumping to conclusions is not critical thinking. To educate our young people, adults must set an example and avoid jumping to rash conclusions. 
An example of this misguided thinking was evident in an article by former legislator and barrister Audrey Eu. She wrote a column recently criticizing the apparently different treatment of officers wearing yellow ribbons compared with officers wearing blue ones. She jumped to the conclusion that the authorities were unfair in allowing people to wear blue ribbons and not allowing others to wear yellow ones. On the surface this does appear unfair, because blue and yellow are just different colors. However, the blue ribbon is a symbol of support for the police carrying out their duty, which is not a political statement. The yellow ribbon is, by contrast, a symbol for a specific form of nomination system, which is a political statement. Police officers are supposed to enforce the law without taking a political stance. So there is thus nothing wrong with wearing a blue ribbon. But the same cannot be said for officers wearing yellow ribbons. I do not understand how a well-known barrister fails to see the difference between the two scenarios. Students coached in critical thinking should be self-critical. They should ensure they have the right understanding before arguing a case and criticizing other people. 



Similarly, our young people are encouraged to campaign for "true universal suffrage" as if "true universal suffrage" were "true democracy". They take their cue from two university professors and a church minister. These three organized "Occupy Central" in the name of civil disobedience with the goal of achieving "true universal suffrage". However, even if it were possible to achieve "true universal suffrage" according to their interpretation, they would still not be achieving true democracy. True democracy, in order to be beneficial to society, has to be based on equal rights for all. Blocking streets and trampling on other peoples' rights or imposing one's views on other people is dictatorial and undemocratic. What is the good of true universal suffrage if you achieve it at the expense of true democracy? 
The rule of law is fundamental to democracy. But apparently our young people are being taught that not respecting the law does not equate to not undermining the rule of law. In an earlier article I criticized Benny Tai for his twisted logic that democracy is the basis for establishing the rule of law. I argued that the reverse is really true. If you have civil nomination and universal suffrage without the rule of law then the people will suffer. In order to have the rule of law, respect for the law is absolutely vital. The vast majority of people in Hong Kong want to see a peaceful and prosperous China, free of the abuse of power. Our leaders in Beijing are working towards this end. 
The requirement for a prospective candidate for the role of Chief Executive (CE) to receive approval by 50 percent of the members of the Nominating Committee (NC) should not be equated with requiring nomination by 50 percent of NC members. The mechanism is for Beijing to block candidates antagonistic to the central government. A "pan-democrat" who wishes to stand for election as CE, like everyone else, only needs to accept Beijing's authority. And doing this will not undermine anyone's political rights. 
The author is director of the Centre for Public Policy Studies at Lingnan University. 

(HK Edition 11/18/2014 page1)

