 



Addressing a local forum on Thursday, Chief Secretary Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor voiced her concern about a lack of consensus on the election of the Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017. Opinions collected so far are still hugely divided since the public consultation on political reform officially kicked off in early December. 
Her worries are truly understandable. There are only two months left before the SAR government's five-month consultation period ends. If all stakeholders stick to their political agendas, and are unable to get back to principles defined by the Basic Law while discussing contentious issues concerning the CE election, then Hong Kong's democratic efforts will be jeopardized. Or as Carrie Lam put it, 2017 universal suffrage in Hong Kong risks being turned into "flowers in the mirror, a moon in the water". 
Unfortunately, the ongoing consultation does not look "so far, so good". The pro-establishment and opposition camps remain poles apart on how universal suffrage is to be implemented. Over the past three months, thoughtful, constructive discussion has been drowned out by irrational noise and counterproductive bickering. Antagonistic attitudes of this kind don't bode well for Hong Kong. 
It is universally known that democracy is the art of compromise. By the combined strength of our common endeavors, we can achieve more together than we achieve alone. Thus, instead of engaging in endless and fruitless political squabbles, everyone should look to the bigger picture of constitutional reform. They should focus more on many of the most pressing issues, such as the size and composition of the Nominating Committee, the number of candidates and voting procedures. 
To accelerate the process in the remaining two months of the consultation period, we must not waste time. We must stop dwelling on inconsistent proposals which lead nowhere. For instance, the Basic Law clearly stipulates that the Nominating Committee is the only body with the power to put forward candidates. This means that party nomination, civil nomination, and any other form of nomination that might bypass or reduce the authority of the Nominating Committee are unconstitutional. They, therefore, merit no further discussion. 
It is quite natural that the whole process toward universal suffrage is destined to be arduous and painful, because achieving this goal requires a lot of compromises by all the stakeholders across the political spectrum. This explains why Carrie Lam sincerely urged people from all sectors of society to maximize inclusiveness, to reduce their differences and to forge the broadest possible consensus. Then, the government can roll out concrete, well-thought-out electoral proposals which benefit the society. Otherwise, ideological bias and disjointed pluralism will sink Hong Kong into a governance crisis frequently seen elsewhere. 

(HK Edition 02/28/2014 page9)

