 
After years of study and consultation with millions of dollars of money spent, the government decided last month not to carry out proposed plans to ease the dreadful traffic jams in the Hung Hom Cross-Harbour Tunnel - citing a lack of consensus. People are disappointed with the decision but do not seem to have been greatly upset by it. We have got used to things like that. 
For the very same reason, plans for - or discourses on - land reclamation, importing labor, medical reforms, pension schemes reform, garbage treatment, tax reform, and introduction of a GST (Goods and Services Tax), etc, have all been shelved or derailed. These are the projects the city badly needs to maintain economic competitiveness and long-term development, and more importantly to help grapple with many of the city's economic and social problems, which have led to social discontent. 
This long list of derailed projects tells us nothing other than a regretful fact: Before developing into a fully fledged democratic regime and benefitting from it, our political system has found itself on a fast track to "vetocracy" - a dysfunctional system of governance whereby no single entity can acquire enough power to make decisions and take effective charge. 
Ironically, some of the key players in public affairs have contributed to this dismal situation instead of properly supervising the government and helping it do its job for the common good. 
The media, controlled by different interests, has not always been helpful in advancing the social agenda. While continuing to champion freedom of the press, the media has helped handicap the government by providing interest-driven parties with a platform to bombard government initiatives with exaggerated, biased, or misleading reports. These in many cases shaped public opinion to the disadvantage of the government. 
The judiciary, tasked to safeguard social justice, has also frequently been taken advantage of by special-interest groups, who file petitions to block policies that are in the best interest of the public, but not theirs. 



Meanwhile, the Legislative Council, whose members represent different interests in society, is a venue for "dogfights" between different interests. The numerous filibusters in the legislature are an example of this. The situation will only get worse when all members of the legislature are returned by popular vote - hopefully by 2020 - and under greater pressure to fight hard for their voters. 
Interests play a pivotal role in social interaction. Such dogfights between conflicting interests - particularly between special interest groups and the majority of society - be it inside the legislature, through media, within the government, or through other platforms, are unlikely to cease. This is especially true as the society is increasingly polarized due to a growing wealth gap, dwindling resources and differences over political reform. It is logical for one to expect a rising vetocracy in the city. 
There ought to be some way to check the ability of special-interest groups to use the veto power, otherwise, the broad majority will be tyrannized by the minority. The social agenda and government policies will be derailed and economic development paralyzed. 
As the creator of these problems, Western-style democracy cannot logically be a good solution to fixing them. In fact, some Western intellectuals have cast doubts over its efficacy. American political scientist Francis Fukuyama has vocally raised the question: Has the US gone from a democracy to a "vetocracy" - a system in which no one can aggregate enough power to make any important decisions? American journalist Thomas Friedman, a three-time Pulitzer Prize winner, was more straightforward in his discourse. The US system isn't a democracy anymore but a vetocracy that prevents anyone from doing much of anything, he said in his New York Times column. 
Perhaps, the conclusion of Moiss Nam, listed as one of the world's leading thinkers by the British magazine Prospect, are even more unpalatable to democracy supporters: "A lot of democracies have become vetocracy, meaning that they are full of small centers of power. Each one has a little bit of power to stop and block and veto the initiatives of others, but no one has enough power to push through an agenda, a policy, and a decision ... There are too many constraints that don't let governments govern." 
If we can't find a good fix from the Western-style system, where can we find one? Can the Singapore system - classified by the Economist Intelligence Unit as a "hybrid" with authoritarian and democratic elements - be an answer to Hong Kong's dilemma? 
This city state fell behind Hong Kong in many social and economic aspects some years ago. But it has now overtaken us. Singapore has surpassed our city in many areas, particularly in terms of economic vitality and the general wellbeing of its people. The city state's GDP was only half that of Hong Kong over 20 years ago and its per capita GDP before 1997 was slightly lower than that of Hong Kong. Today the Lion City's GDP is slightly ahead and GDP per capita is about 40 percent higher than in Hong Kong. In the World Happiness Report 2013 published by the United Nations last September, Singapore topped Asia and ranked 30th globally, well ahead of Hong Kong (64th), as well as many Asian democracies including South Korea (41st), Taiwan (42nd), Japan (43rd), the Philippines (92nd) and India (111th). 
Much of Singapore's widely admired success has been accredited to its "hybrid" political system. This system has frequently been a target for mockery from cynical critics here and elsewhere. But can these critics possibly answer this key question: What merit or worthiness does a political system have aside from its ability to enhance the general wellbeing of people and make them happy? 
The author is a current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 03/12/2014 page1)

