



The "Occupy Central" campaign has dragged on for over a month. So far there are no signs of it ending. Although the government and the Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) had discussions last month, the two sides came to no agreement. They remain entrenched in their different positions. There is a now the need for some initiative to end the "Occupy" campaign. The HKFS recently asked "pan-democrat" lawmakers to resign to force a "referendum". In theory a "referendum" might offer a solution to ending the illegal campaign. But in reality, this suggestion is impractical. 
The idea is unrealistic. In theory, if all the "pan-democrat" members in the Legislative Council (LegCo) were to resign there would be by-elections across all sectors. This might trigger public support for the "pan-democrat" camp. So to those with idealistic attitudes to democracy, a referendum is the best way to seek people's views. Many young people support the idea of a "resignation-induced referendum". It could be said that the younger people are, the more likely they are to support it. But older people (including those from the "pan-democrat" camp) remain more skeptical. 
In reality, a "resignation-induced referendum" would not be good for all the different political parties. This is why neither the "pan-democrat" and pro-establishment camps, nor the government, support it. There are also differing views on this within the "pan-democrat" camp. 
A "resignation-induced referendum" means that the original lawmakers have to give up their seats in the LegCo. The "pan-democrat" camp can call a new election to get back their seats. If they were to succeed, this would be symbolic. But in reality the resignations would bring few practical benefits. 
First, "pan-democratic" members would need to go through certain procedures to stand for re-election. This would mean additional problems and "Occupy" has already caused great inconvenience to the public. 
There are now powerful voices calling for the campaign to end. A recent survey conducted by the Hong Kong Polytechnic University indicated that nearly 75 percent of people would like it to stop. When the full impact of "Occupy" becomes truly apparent, there will be a high likelihood of the "pan-democratic" camp losing their seats. They may not win back all their seats. This would demonstrate that they have lost public support. Moreover, if the "pan-democrats" lost some of their significant seats in LegCo, they would also lose their power of veto. The disadvantages of a referendum are so great to the "pan-democratic" camp that the risk is not worth taking. No wonder many commentators say the "resignation induced referendum" is a bad idea. 
And yet it may provide opportunities for the pro-establishment camp. However, they are also not keen on the idea. But if "pan-democratic" lawmakers were to resign, they would have a chance to field candidates to run in a new election. Most likely they would win seats from the "pan-democrats". 
However, participation in such an election will imply that the rules of the game are being dictated by the HKFS and the "pan-democrats". Would this be a good thing for the pro-establishment camp? Moreover, the organization of new elections may take several months. Given that there will be another round of elections in 2016, the re-elected LegCo members would only be in office for a year or so. So it would be difficult for them to perform in such a short time frame. 
The government has also made it clear that a "resignation-induced referendum" is not practical. While a "referendum" may offer a breakthrough during the current political impasse, it will do more harm than good. There may end up being many more "referendums". The government could then be a difficult situation. Currently, the government understands the rules of the game. But a referendum would produce new variables. Surely the government cannot accept this. 
At the moment, a "resignation-induced referendum" does not seem to have the support of any of the political parties - except for a few idealistic young people. It is unlikely the idea will be widely accepted. The risk, however, is that the radicals may end up taking over the "Occupy" movement. 
The author is dean of the School of Business at Hang Seng Management College. 

(HK Edition 11/06/2014 page10)

