


      Relatively moderate opposition parties and activists saw their proposed plans for constitutional reform rejected in a vote held in conjunction with the third "Occupy Central Deliberation Day" ("D-Day") on Tuesday. This suggests "Occupy Central" is in danger of being hijacked by radicals committed to street politics. The result of the poll surprised not only their sponsors, but also the pro-establishment parties. Incidentally, the latest issue of The Economist criticizes Taiwan's "Sunflower Movement" against the Cross-Straits Agreement on Services Trade and similar protests against nuclear power plant No 4 in Taipei earlier this year. The magazine warns that Taiwan's future could soon be at the mercy of street politics.
      
        Although Hong Kong and Taiwan are facing different political issues, they have something in common: Both are paying heavily for allowing mainstream political debate to degenerate into street politics.
        
          Street politics usually refers to mass demonstrations organized by political parties to achieve their goals. It often involves protesters storming government and law enforcement facilities to delay or even paralyze government operations. In Asia, from "Occupy the Legislative Yuan" in Taiwan to "Occupy Central" in Hong Kong and "Occupy Bangkok" in Thailand, the destructive power of street politics is clearly evident.
          
            Street politics has torn society apart. Political groups fight one another, leaving the government unable to restore order. When the authorities are forced to respond to endless public disturbances the efficiency of government services are severely affected. Democracy and good governance are not always two sides of the same coin. While arguing over universal suffrage, Hongkongers should ask themselves why Taiwan's leader, Ma Ying-jeou, who was elected by universal suffrage has become a "lame duck" leader, as noted by The Economist. And what about Yingluck Shinawatra? The former prime minister of Thailand was popularly elected, but she was ordered to step down by the country's constitutional court on Wednesday for "abuse of power". Should we regard these developments as progress or setbacks for democracy?
            
              In recent years, Hong Kong has become known as a "city of demonstrations". But Hong Kong residents enjoy just as much freedom of speech, the press, assembly, association and rule of law as people in any Western country - even though the Chief Executive is not yet elected by universal suffrage. However, if the growing trend of street politics increases, it will harm Hong Kong.
              
                The city is also suffering from regular filibustering tactics in the Legislative Council (LegCo) along with protesters blocking government buildings. LegCo members such as Leung Kwok-hung ("Long Hair") are frequently seen on television protesting and shouting insults instead of performing their official duties. Politicians oppose the government for the sake of it. This often means the government cannot operate normally or serve society effectively.
                
                  Street politics is ultimately derived from democratic politics. However, it may also deviate from the most important characteristics of democratic politics. One of these is representation. Street politics does not automatically represent the popular will. For example, the three "winning" plans for constitutional development in the "D-Day" poll only represent the wishes of certain radical opposition groups. They do not reflect the views of moderate pan-democracy parties or the pro-establishment camp - let alone mainstream Hong Kong society.
                  
                    How much street politics is truly representative of people in other countries is also open to debate. The Ukraine is a case in point. Protesters in Kiev apparently do not agree with people in eastern Ukraine. But are they not all Ukrainian citizens?
                    
                      Other characteristics of democracy are legitimacy and fairness. In a mature, orderly democratic system the popular will should influence public policies through institutionalized channels. Given its disruptive, often destructive tendencies, street politics is not the best way to deal with social issues.
                      
                        Although organizers of "Occupy Central" insist the campaign is peaceful, the public believes the campaign will be hijacked by radical groups. This will lead to irrational behavior on our streets. There are numerous examples of street politics resulting in mob rule despite pledges by organizers to keep protests peaceful throughout the world. The ancient Greek political scientist Polybius described such destructive behavior as the "twisted majority tyranny incited by politics". History tells us protests devoid of real meaning cannot lead to true political transformation. The Occupy Wall Street protest movement, for example, set off worldwide "occupy" protests against the "undue influence of business" - particularly the financial sector - on the government. Despite its symbolic significance, the movement failed. It was unable to reach its goal of forcing the government to deal with inequality.
                        
                          Street politics fans popular discontent with sentimental slogans. These often spark anger - even violence. A well developed civil society should be rational and tolerant. It is always best to express public aspirations through established channels under constitutional rule.
                          
                            Also, if society responds to the antics of street politics it risks encouraging neurotic, even extreme political behavior. This goes against the nature of democratic debate. When street politics is used to sidestep constitutional order it is no longer democratic but anti-democratic.
                            
                              Mature Western democratic politics is about compromise. But in Asia, where democracy is imported, it tends to be about struggle - not compromise. If the dispute over arrangements for universal suffrage continues in Hong Kong without any compromise it could delay universal suffrage indefinitely. That is not what local residents expect.
                              
                                The author is a current affairs commentator.
                                
(HK Edition 05/09/2014 page9)

