
The "One Country, Two Systems" policy is a significant innovation of human civilization. As the name implies, it consists of the two perspectives of the central government and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR). It is not possible to grasp the full implications of the policy without having a balanced understanding of the two perspectives, in other words, to see it from a holistic viewpoint. 
Recently, Zhang Rongshun, a Basic Law expert, expressed his concerns that some people in Hong Kong still held a one-sided view of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy. 
Under such circumstances, he proposed that Hong Kong people were obliged to launch a "re-enlightenment" of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy. 
Emily Lau Wai-hing, a Legislative Council lawmaker, said she was confused by this proposal. According to her understanding of the Basic Law, Hong Kong's way of life was to remain unchanged for 50 years and the city would eventually embrace a democratic system. 
This is where the problem lies. Words such as "non-intervention", "high degree of autonomy", "to maintain the prosperity and stability of Hong Kong" have frequently been heard since the handover, not to mention Lau's "50 years unchanged and embrace democracy". However, such phrases only reflect one perspective of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy. 
Under the policy, Hong Kong enjoys the right to manage its own internal affairs and at the same time, has the responsibility to safeguard the national interests as a whole. 
The central government will not involve itself in the internal affairs of the region, but when it comes to affairs relating to the central authorities and the relationship between the central government and the HKSAR, the final say remains with the central government. 
The format of universal suffrage in the SAR falls exactly within the central government's jurisdiction. It simply can't be determined unilaterally by the SAR in a so-called self-determination. 
Neither of the two perspectives should be overemphasized or ignored. Otherwise, it would amount to a castration of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy. 
A report of the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) states that national sovereignty, security and development interests need to be safeguarded. Also, the long-term prosperity and stability of Hong Kong is to be protected. The decision of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee made it clear that the central authority is to execute its power in accordance with the law. Hong Kong's high degree of autonomy is also to be guaranteed in accordance with the law. Such comprehensive expression is a correction of the previous interpretation, which requires the attention of Hong Kong people. 
The previous controversy surrounding the State Council's white paper on the practice of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy, is a typical example of a one-sided view toward the two perspectives of the policy. The white paper was not coming from nowhere. The political setup of the SAR and the relationship between the SAR and the central government elaborated in the white paper are actually enshrined in the Basic Law. 
It is understandable that Hong Kong people, who get used to the one-sided explanation of the Basic Law, find it confusing when they hear a comprehensive explanation in the white paper. Naturally some, who refuse to hear the holistic view of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy, choose to ignore it. 
In this regard, Hong Kong people really need "re-enlightenment". 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 




(HK Edition 12/18/2014 page10)

