
On Aug 31, the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) made its historic decision on the method for the election of the Chief Executive (CE) by universal suffrage in 2017. The decision is without question lawful and legally binding for Hong Kong even though not welcomed by the opposition camp - which has threatened to launch the "Occupy Central" campaign. The campaign is an illegal, unjustified civil disobedience movement. 
There was nothing unexpected about the decision if one re-examines the contents of the Basic Law. If the principles of the Basic Law are fully implemented, then the electoral base of the Election Committee (EC) of 1,200 people will be replaced by universal suffrage. The committee of 1,200 will be enlarged to include millions of legally registered voters. This is a great leap forward in our democratic development in Hong Kong. 
Perfect democracy does not exist anywhere in the world, and nothing can be considered an ideal form of universal suffrage. Because there is no perfect system, one that is unquestionably an improvement upon its predecessor should be widely accepted. Any rational person would be wise enough not to reject such a system. It is always better to have something rather than nothing. 
Even if the opposition finds the NPCSC's decision unacceptable, I still believe it is a very rational decision. This decision needs to be understood by examining the composition of the Nominating Committee (NC), the democratic procedure for nomination and the quota for CE candidates. Allow me to explain this: 
In regard to the number and the composition of the NC, guidelines were given in the NPCSC's decision - as early as December 2007. The decision made reference to the existing EC - both of which should be formed by principles of being "broadly representative" and of "balanced participation". 



A nomination body formed by such principles will normally produce better-quality choices of CE candidate (compared with public nomination) and less-biased choices of candidate (compared with party nomination). This is more appropriate than any other nomination body for a society as diverse as Hong Kong. 
To avoid unnecessary controversy and debate, the NPCSC has decided to make the NC the same as the EC, although minor adjustments to local legislation may be allowed. 
The nomination body for the choice of CE candidates will be more or less the same after the introduction of universal suffrage, but the mechanism for nomination will differ. In comparing the existing Annex I and Article 45(2) of the Basic Law, at least four differences can be seen. These are: (1) Whereas Annex I discusses nomination by individual members of the EC, Article 45(2) is about nomination by democratic procedures and reflects the collective will of the whole body. (2) Whereas Annex I limits each member of the EC to nominate one candidate, there is no such limitation on members of the NC. (3) There is no quota of candidates for Annex I. But there is a quota of 2-3 candidates allowed by the NPCSC decision. (4) Whereas the functions of the EC include both nominating and electing, the function of the NC is restricted to nominating. The NPCSC has merely confirmed the legislative intent of the Basic Law in its decision. 
In regard to the issue of democratic procedures for nomination, this has attracted much debate in Hong Kong. Democratic procedure means the rule of the majority, regardless of the possibility of different interpretations. Although this may not be a perfect arrangement, a majority greater than 50 percent is the most popular. As the NPCSC is vested with the power to interpret the Basic Law, it can make the most appropriate interpretation of the phrase "democratic procedure" in order to select the best candidates for universal suffrage. 
Democratic procedures by NC demand a quota of CE candidates. In normal cases of universal suffrage, having too many candidates causes more problems than having too few candidates. I believe 2-3 candidates are appropriate. 
We should all remember that civil disobedience is only justified in cases of terrible injustice. So it is certainly wrong to launch any form of "civil disobedience" campaign as a response. This could cause chaos, civil unrest and damage our international reputation in regard to the rule of law and the "One Country Two Systems" principle. 
The author is a HK veteran commentator and professor at the Research Center of Hong Kong and Macao Basic Law, Shenzhen University. 

(HK Edition 09/01/2014 page9)

