

There is a curious charity group by the name of Samaritans. In the "About Us" section of its Hong Kong chapter's website, it claims itself as a "non-profit, non-religious organization giving confidential emotional support to people who are suicidal or are in general distress. The service is provided to anyone regardless of age, creed, ethnicity, gender or sexual orientation." 

As if to dispel any doubt about its claim to be "non-religious", the second question in the website's Q&A section is "Are you a religious group?" The answer provided is, "No. Our name is a historical accident although the Biblical Samaritan is a role model we follow in that we will help anyone of any race, color or creed." 

By "historical accident", perhaps the organization is referring to the fact that it was founded in 1952 by Chad Varah, a vicar in the London Diocese. Historic? Perhaps. Accident? Perhaps not. 

Why has the Samaritans forsaken its past? What is there to be ashamed of in having Christian roots? 

Suppose a teenager calls the Samaritans hotline, and tells the councilor that she has to commit suicide because she was caught shoplifting, and the government's anti-juvenile crime TV advertisement (in 1996) claimed that there were "no second takes in life", how should the councilor respond? This is how I would comfort the girl: "Notwithstanding the fact that people were all dead at the end of the government advertisement, a criminal record is really not that big a deal." 

The concept that life is better than death, no matter in what circumstances, is a recent idea. If it has always been true, we would not be running marathons. Instead, we will be using the story of the Ancient Greek runner, Pheidippides, as a precaution against overtraining. 

Recently, some Japanese were trying to immortalize their kamikaze pilots - a squad of young pilots who deliberately crashed their aircraft into Allied warships during World War II. The Japanese wanted to enshrine the final letters of these pilots as UN world heritage items. This triggered a furious reaction in China - as it was perceived as an attempt to glorify aggression. 

Indeed. But how about The Three Musketeers, where M. d'Artagnan the elder advised his son to fight on all occasions, and "fight the more for duels being forbidden, since consequently there is twice as much courage in fighting"? Can we leave our kids with such poison? 

Sometimes, we are brainwashed into believing that there really are universal values - that our faith never collides with others'. We respect all religions, but Hinduism must first renounce the caste system and accept that everyone is born equal. We treasure cultural diversity, as long as cannibals do not practice cannibalism. 

We are less gullible when it comes to democracy. Zhang Dejiang, head of the National People's Congress Standing Committee, has made it clear that "importing Western-style democracy for the planned direct election in Hong Kong in 2017 could lead to disastrous results." Forget about Professor Larry Diamond, the political sociologist and leading contemporary scholar in the field of democracy studies, who tried to preach the sermon to us yellow people. 

Recently, a Christian school in the city has banned gay teachers and made staff sign a "Morality Contract". Employees, according to the school's staff guidelines, should be above reproach in areas of "sexual orientation and behavior, marital and parental relationships, personal finances, addictive substances, and leisure activities". This has created an uproar, as activists think that the school should not discriminate against homosexuality. 

The Reverend Peter Douglas Koon, provincial secretary-general for the Anglican Church in Hong Kong, cashed in on its rival's PR crisis. He told the press that their Anglican schools in Hong Kong would not apply the same rules. "You cannot assume gay people will promote homosexuality (to pupils)," he said. We must ask this pseudo-liberal, what's wrong if the teachers do promote homosexuality? 

The next day, these "Christians" will be telling us that the Bible is full of typos, as in "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination" (Leviticus 18:22 KJV), and in "If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them" (Leviticus 20:13 KJV). 

At the end, it is difficult to decide which one is more despicable: the anti-homosexual Christianity, or its opportunist variant. 

The author is a current affairs commentator. 


(HK Edition 03/21/2014 page7)

