
Pandora's Box has now been opened in Hong Kong. What has been released is a strong distrust of the SAR government as well as the central government - particularly among the younger generation - as well as much upheaval in society. 
The "Occupy Central" movement and radical student political activities in recent months have led to considerable social and political divisions in Hong Kong. One cannot deny the possibility of political interference and manipulation by US intelligence agencies to destabilize Hong Kong. This is in order to stop China's spectacular economic and global rise. There is clearly evidence of involvement by US officials. 
Another concern is the failure of the police in Hong Kong last Sunday to arrest protesters in areas near the government headquarters - particularly those people directing the strategy and tactics of the core group of protesters. This allowed the protesters to re-group after the police had used tear gas and to encourage more people to join the demonstrations. The protests then spread to Admiralty, Wan Chai, Causeway Bay and even to Mong Kok in Kowloon. 



"Occupy Central" has become a campaign aimed at paralyzing Hong Kong's major urban centers. 
Surprisingly, the size of the protests is smaller than expected. At most, there have been no more than 60,000 people protesting - as claimed by the demonstrators themselves. Hong Kong is still maintaining law and order except for a few areas where the protesters are prevalent. 
Transport has been seriously affected in some places, but there has not been mass of people coming out to challenge the government and police which the organizers of "Occupy Central" had hoped for. The police need to implement their tactics astutely and control the area around government headquarters. This will then force the protesters to test the patience of ordinary citizens, whose lives are being disrupted. Police should also arrest organizers of the protests for their role in illegal activities and aggressive confrontations with the police. These arrests will deprive the demonstrators of their leaders while forcing more people to be accountable before the law. 
In the next couple of days, Hong Kong's authorities may suffer a loss of trust and credibility in the eyes of the public. But the government must never yield to the unreasonable political demands of the protesters. These include calls for the resignation of the Chief Executive and senior officials and the rescinding of the decision of the Standing Committee of the National People Congress (NPCSC). The government should not even hold a meeting with the protesters to give them any legitimacy. The outcome of the protests will ultimately depend on the patience of ordinary citizens and how long they will tolerate such disruption. 
The protesters have not achieved their real aim of regime change in Hong Kong. They know very well this would never be allowed by the central government. They might use their confrontations with police as a way to get more sympathy from the citizens and to encourage greater participation from naive young people. As the government has ignored their demands and the police have exercised considerable restraint then what is the point of occupying parts of the city and disrupting public transport? How long can they continue with such tactics? In a few days the protests will surely have to stop. 



In the long term, and this is probably what the demonstrators and those behind them really want, the protest movement may encourage more opposition towards the SAR government. This will be most evident in schools and universities. Some sections of society seem to give in too easily to anti-government activists. Many of these people include teachers and academics. They may encourage further protests from the younger generation against the SAR and central governments. Anti-central government and anti-mainland sentiment might spread further to areas such as education, culture, politics and social work. 
Many frustrated young people wrongly believe the government is weak and can be defeated. So they will constantly try to obstruct government policies. They aim to cripple not just Hong Kong's major business centers but its entire system of government. 
These protests could ultimately make the city ungovernable. They will also stop it developing into a full democracy. The true motives of the protest leaders are clearly destructive. They are not concerned about the welfare of ordinary citizens and young people in Hong Kong. They are actually part of an international political struggle to defend the power of the US - the so-called bastion of world democracy - but in reality a country which protects the vested interests of a privileged few. 
The author is director of Public Policy Research Institute and Head of China Business Centre at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. 

(HK Edition 10/02/2014 page4)

