



Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying on Saturday told the organizers of the weeklong siege that the government would hold a dialogue with the demonstrators, but government offices as well as blocked roads must be allowed to reopen by Monday. 
The illegal siege of government headquarters has set an extremely dangerous precedent at the expense of Hong Kong society, and has inflicted heavy damage on the city's economy and image as an international financial center. It's a matter for the authorities to reopen traffic around the government complex so that the civil service can resume work, and businesses can return to normal in the prime commercial areas. 
Hong Kong people are well-known for their hospitality and tolerance, as long as there's mutual respect and their interests are secure. 
No one has the right to violate citizens' basic rights, especially with pretentious fairy tales as fighting for "true democracy" and "genuine universal suffrage". 
Giving non-existent "international standards" as the excuse, organizers of the "Occupy Central" campaign have been wantonly trampling on the basic rights of millions of Hong Kong residents for more than a week, including children's right to go to school. It's high time they were held responsible for carrying out such a destructive act. 
The undeniable truth is that the masterminds of the campaign have never aimed to work for any form of democracy to succeed in Hong Kong in the first place, and they will be the last to endorse any Chief Executive (CE) election candidate unless he or she is openly anti-Beijing. 
They know the central government will never appoint as CE someone who is prepared to use his or her power to oppose Beijing. That means allowing such a person to run for the CE's office may bring about a constitutional crisis. Of course, the "Occupy" organizers will never admit it, but that's the only reason for them to insist on damaging public interests and refuse to back down despite mounting public condemnation of their unlawful behavior. 
During the week-long unlawful campaign, city life close to the occupied locations has come to a standstill. Students couldn't go to school; workers couldn't go about their business; government staff couldn't report for duty. 
A growing number of residents are getting frustrated with the disruption to their lives, as evidenced by a rising number of scuffles between pro- and anti-"Occupy" groups. With a full working week about to begin, it's time to restore order and peace to our city life. 

(HK Edition 10/06/2014 page5)

