



Running out of fresh ideas some opposition lawmakers are planning to rehash old tricks by resigning from the Legislative Council (LegCo) to jump-start by-elections as a form of de facto referendum on their self-righteous "genuine universal suffrage". 
They acted in a similar way in 2010. Dubbed as the "five constituencies referendum", five legislators from the League of Social Democrats and the Civil Party resigned from the LegCo, prompting by-elections resulting in a record low turnout, at the taxpayers' expense. 
Instead of redeeming their misdeeds, and with no better script, a bunch of die-hard opposition legislators are replaying their insidious dirty tricks. This is the latest move in a string of political farces, aimed at keeping the rapidly cooling pot of the "Occupy Central" movement on the boil. Although at this stage the proposal has yet to be endorsed by all opposition factions, in principal they apparently see it as a way forward for the "Occupy" movement. After all, as the old saying goes, drowning men will clutch at straws. 
We all know that to hold city-wide by-elections in Hong Kong, huge sums of public money - easily exceeding HK$100 million, would have to be wasted. The vast majority of Hong Kong people definitely wouldn't want to see public money dumped in the service of the opposition's political agenda. 
Moreover, the orchestration of by-elections does more harm in society than simply squander public resources. As Chief Secretary for Administration Carrie Lam clearly pointed out, there is no such thing as a referendum under Hong Kong's current electoral and political systems. In other words, any social activity going by the name of "referendum" is unconstitutional and has no legal standing. 
Clear-minded citizens should be aware that this latest round of proposed "referenda" would be a continuation of the so called "umbrella movement" - Hong Kong's version of a "color revolution" in nature. We should never allow high-stakes political games of this kind to challenge the central authority's power and undermine the national sovereignty. 
The "Occupy" movement has entered its sixth week with no sign of a solution, leaving many small and medium-sized businesses with no choice but lay-offs and pay freezes, or even closures. Therefore it came as no surprise that the anti-"Occupy" Alliance for Peace and Democracy received a record-breaking 1.5 million plus signatures during its week-long petition in favor of the restoration of the rule of law. The opposition needs to think twice about the possible consequence of stirring up more trouble against the mainstream public will and unscrupulously challenging Beijing's bottom line. 

(HK Edition 11/03/2014 page9)

