 



At long last different groups of Hong Kong people are beginning to show their community spirit and do something positive in countering the trouble-making "Occupy Central" campaign. A fine example is being set by those retired police officers, who will join forces with like-minded civil groups, staging a march this weekend to demonstrate their support for the serving members of the police who will face the tough task of maintaining public order in the face of disruptive behavior by those who insist on causing mischief. 
Meanwhile a new anti-"Occupy" group, the Alliance for Peace and Democracy, hopes to attract 50,000 to 60,000 public-spirited Hongkongers to join a march from Victoria Park to Central on Aug 17 that will demonstrate the rising feeling among the man-in-the-street against "Occupy" plans to bring chaos and mayhem to core business in Central. 
Alliance spokesman Robert Chow Yung has clearly stated the goal of the group: "There is only one theme for our march - it is for peace and universal suffrage. It is not anti-anyone. But by coming forward Hongkongers will be sending a strong message to 'Occupy' organizers." 
The alliance will also offer free legal advice to small businesses in Central on what steps they can take against the "Occupy" campaign because of the risk it poses to their daily operations. 
Also on the legal front, a new group comprising lawyers has come forward to suggest that small companies affected by any possible "Occupy" sit-in could apply for injunctions against the protesters. 
Another sign of growing public impatience over the aims of the "Occupy" campaign came from an unexpected source a few days ago when drivers of about 60 minibuses staged a "sit-in" by parking in one of Mong Kok's busiest thoroughfares, Fa Yuen Street. 
On top of this the Public Light Bus General Association said anti-"Occupy" posters would be carried this week by more than 1,000 of its red minibuses. 
This mounting groundswell of public opinion against the "Occupy" campaign is expected to gain further momentum in coming weeks as more civic-minded groups go public. 
Nevertheless the "Occupy" campaign will indeed be a very testing time for the "thin blue line" of police responsible for maintaining law and order across Central at this crucial time. 
It is to be hoped that the "Occupy" demonstrators exercise restraint and commonsense, obey police instructions and refrain from any action that may force police to resort to physical action. 
The acting director of police operations Cheng Tak-keung has made it clear that while our finest have rules and procedures restricting the use of force, their actions will be proportionate to the resistance they encounter, regardless of provocation. 

(HK Edition 07/31/2014 page9)

