
The dissidents are launching a noncooperation movement in which they urge people to delay paying government rent and pay taxes in small sums, the South China Morning Post reported on Monday. 
"'Occupy' is taking on different forms. While the government has no timetable for universal suffrage, we do have a timetable to fight for it and challenge the legitimacy of the government," Alex Chow Yong-kang, secretary general of the Federation of Students was reported as saying. We are now familiar with his brand of rhetoric - as witnessed in the now-famous line: "We are blocking the city's roads because the government is blocking our road to democracy." 
Chow's noncooperation movement is a watered-down version of Benny Tai Yiu-ting's idea. "Refusal to pay taxes, delaying rent payments by tenants in public housing estates and filibustering in the Legislative Council, along with other such acts of non-cooperation, could make governing more inconvenient," he wrote in The New York Times. Refusal to pay taxes is making a statement of sorts, paying them in split payments is a joke. 
Chow assured us that the proposed actions are legal. Of course they are. There are no laws against people splitting their tax payments into small sums, or tenants not paying their rent until the last possible moment. Putting aside the altogether unimportant question as to whether these actions mean anything at all, this non-cooperation movement has nothing objectionable. 
The radicals said salary, tax and rent were chosen as targets because they were unhappy that the government was spending taxpayers' money on "white elephant infrastructure projects" and land policies that benefit developers. We would think that as an offshoot of "Occupy", which supposedly is about democracy, the radicals' narrative should connect tax and rent with "genuine universal suffrage". But "Occupy" began more than 80 days ago and perhaps they have forgotten what the original goal was. 
But perhaps it is about democracy after all. Franklen Choi Kin-shing, a social sciences lecturer, suggested that people, while paying their full tax bill, should split payments into checks for sums of HK$689 or HK$6.89 - a reference to the number of Election Committee votes that put Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying in office. 
Again, perhaps it isn't. The point is: Banks, not the government, process checks. But we cannot blame Choi for this lapse. After all, he is in the social sciences, not finance or public administration. 
The noncooperation movement will increase sales of stamps and envelopes, besides the workload of postmen and bank staff. As for Leung Chun-ying and other senior officials, they won't notice anything unusual. As far as they are concerned, all taxes due will have been collected. 
This reminds us of the protesters in Mong Kok who harass pedestrians and shops by using a tactic called gau wu - a Cantonese transliteration of gou wu in Putonghua, which means "to shop", or, in other words, roam around in the shopping areas to obstruct commerce. 
To punish a salesperson who was allegedly disrespectful to "Occupy" in Mong Kok, a group of "Occupy shoppers" "occupied" the store concerned. They ransacked it, unfolded articles of clothing, removed clothes displayed on mannequins before finally buying something.



Initially Benny Tai's idea for "Occupy" was to inspire a following for the cause of democracy. However, the movement ended up alienating the majority of Hong Kong people. Prior to the "Occupy" actions many were sympathetic to the dissidents, or at worst felt no malevolence towards them. The "Occupy" movement has, for the first time, provided Hong Kong people with concrete reasons to loathe our dissidents. 
Being the most dogmatic generation of all time, Hong Kong's young radicals are oblivious to the growing public discontent. Their tactics, including gau wu and the non-cooperation movement, harm no one but people in the frontline - postmen, bank tellers, shop assistants, etc. 
The uneventful end of "Occupy" and subsequent non-cooperation movement mark the beginning of the dissidents' downfall. The government and pro-establishment camp should take this opportunity to launch a series of major changes to rebuild Hong Kong into a harmonious, vibrant and prosperous society. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 12/17/2014 page10)

