



Afew weeks ago, the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) Standing Committee voted to strip Liberal Party leader James Tien of his membership of the CPPCC National Committee. This was the first time the Standing Committee had ever revoked the membership of a National Committee member by invoking Clause 29 of CPPCC Charter. For this reason, it has become a heated topic in Hong Kong. 
As a member of the CPPCC, I was invited to RTHK's City Forum to express my opinion on this issue. In Clause 29, it clearly states that if a member violates a decision made by the CPPCC plenary meetings, the Standing Committee is entitled to sanction that member, including removing the delegate in the case of a serious violation. The fact that this clause had never been invoked does not imply that it never should be - we must first be clear about this. 
In March this year, the CPPCC plenary session unanimously approved its full support for the Chief Executive (CE) and the SAR government in their administration of the law. This has been constantly repeated by the central government in recent months. But James Tien, who had neither respected this decision nor made any constructive contribution to either the CE or the SAR government, urged CE Leung Chun-ying to resign during the "Occupy" protests that have affected parts of the city. This is unacceptable. It is an obvious violation of the rules, and, as anticipated, has led to his dismissal. Tien himself even admitted to "having forgotten about his role in the CPPCC" and accepted the decision. This justifies the legality of the Standing Committee's decision. So there is no need to over-interpret their decision. 
I would like to further point out that the ultimate source of the current disorder in society is the trouble generated by the opposition against the government. The low efficiency of the government has been caused by trouble-makers through their filibustering and other uncooperative actions. Take "Occupy" for example - the principal culprits are the initiators. Therefore, it is simply wrong for someone who is supposed to support the SAR government to groundlessly blame it when it is not responsible for the situation. The discussions being heard in Hong Kong society suggest the public's scant understanding of the CPPCC's role. Many people believe that a CPPCC member is only a puppet of the central government, without any concrete responsibilities. Having borne this obligation for over 16 years, I will now share details of my job as a member of the CPPCC in order to improve public understanding. 
Since 1949, the country has constituted a unique political system to guarantee democracy as well as the ruling power of the Communist Party of China (CPC), while democracy requires the existence of both the National People's Congress (NPC) and CPPCC, to monitor the government. In the administration of the CPC, the advice of the NPC and the CPPCC must be taken into consideration to ensure that policies are to the benefit of the general public. 
As for the difference between the NPC and the CPPCC, the former is selected and the latter is appointed from among patriotic people of all parties, peoples, communities and industries. In the CPPCC Charter, it clarifies the function of a delegate, which is to consult, monitor and advise. Therefore, a delegate is totally free to express his individual opinions to the government, as long as the contribution is constructive instead of trouble-making. 
As far as I am aware, many CPPCC members have, over decades, offered a wealth of suggestions and advice to improve the government, including reducing corruption, improving efficiency, and so on. 
Some would ask whether it might be contradictory, or a conflict of interest, for a person to be a member of both the CPPCC and the Legislative Council (LegCo). 
In actual fact, there is no contradiction between being pro-Beijing and loving Hong Kong. Hong Kong has always been a part of China - this is a concept which shouldn't cause confusion. The so-called divergence between the two is simply caused by the tricks purposely played by some politicians. 
It is the existence of such politicians that gives the CPPCC its raison d'etre, for they are familiar with both mainland and Hong Kong affairs, and can, hence, act as a bridge to communication. This is to bring further stability to Hong Kong, which is undoubtedly beneficial to our city. 
The writer is vice-president of the Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 11/13/2014 page11)

