



Leaders of the Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) have spared no effort in portraying themselves as vanguards of democracy. Yet the arrogant and provocative language some of them used in their speech announcing a week-long school boycott shattered the halo above their heads. 
In announcing their plans at a Sunday press conference, the HKFS leaders demanded an apology from the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC) for its decision to set the framework for the selection of Hong Kong's Chief Executive by "one person, one vote". 
In challenging the authority of the country's top legislature, they showed contempt for State power, and insulted the Chinese nation. 
Defiant acts of this kind are hardly heard about elsewhere in the world. 
Equally rare and outlandish were the provocative actions by some of these student leaders in previous protest activities. 
These have included parading colonial-era symbols in street demonstrations and when trespassing onto a People's Liberation Army barracks. 
These are not as some have said "childish" behavior or simply a colonial hangover. 
Rather, by frequently emphasizing the colonial history of the city, these political fanatics have been trying to develop a so-called "Hong Kong identity", with the delusions of Hong Kong "realizing self-determination" and eventually becoming an independent political entity. 
The close ties these political radicals maintain with Taiwan independence activists, as demonstrated by their frequent interactions of late, are among further evidence of their treacherous conduct. 
Unfortunately, the top student organization in the city has been hijacked and manipulated by these political extremists for their own political aspirations at the expense of the interests of Hong Kong. 
Rather than helping advance democracy in Hong Kong, they are capitalizing on controversy over electoral reform to advance their own political agenda. 
Beneath their democratic guise lie ulterior motives. 
These traitorous souls are trying to sow the seeds for future hatred in the minds of Hong Kong people. This is in the hope of nurturing bitter hostility against the central government and to rally support for their cause. 
Many of the city's innocent students have been hoodwinked by the democratic disguise of these political radicals. They are at risk of being misled into participating in activities likely to cause harm to their studies and to their futures. 
Leaders in society, as well as parents, are duty-bound to provide timely and appropriate guidance to the youngsters in case political schemers take advantage of them. 

(HK Edition 09/09/2014 page10)

