


      Hong Kong police started to remove part of "Occupy Central" barricades in Central, Admiralty and Causeway Bay on Tuesday and those in Mong Kok on Friday. Consequently, normal traffic was partially restored to the busiest thoroughfares on Hong Kong Island and in Kowloon.
      
        The public went about their daily business as if nothing had happened. The melodramatic scenes played out on live television in the early days of the illegal movement are now history, and video archives.
        
          Some "occupiers" doggedly remain near the blockade sites, while pro-"Occupy" media at home and abroad were visibly disappointed. They began reminding people how remarkable "Occupy" has been and how historically significant it will be to the mainland and Hong Kong.
          
            Foreign commentators even gathered statistics from various sources to prove "Occupy" had caused nowhere near as much financial damage as many thought.
            
              One simply labeled the concerns and warnings of the business community and the SAR government prior to the illegal campaign as "scare mongering". This is an interesting choice of words, I have to say. Does that mean "Occupy" is overrated or a spectacular letdown? Must we believe "the Occupy Central Manifesto" was merely hot air and the impressive terms such as "political weapon of mass destruction" used by "Occupy" initiator Benny Tai Yiu-ting, just a joke? What of the threat to paralyze Central? Are the "occupiers" serious or not?
              
                Ultimately, Hong Kong, now returning to its normal daily activities, has given the "Occupy" organizers reasons to feel disappointed, or even betrayed.
                
                  Where was the "popular support" of which they boasted, when they most needed it? I sincerely hope pro-"Occupy" commentators will verify the facts before declaring the movement represents the public of Hong Kong.
                  
                    Personally I didn't believe for an instant that "Occupy" could achieve its goals. Although I'm still not sure what exactly its goals were. Everyone who passed through the "hot spots" daily was inconvenienced by roadblocks for more than three weeks. I was annoyed to spend more time in the morning going to work and more time during the evening rush hours returning home.
                    
                      I understand why some locals confronted "occupiers" blocking traffic in their neighborhoods. Hongkongers are tolerant people, but the tolerance should not be taken for granted.
                      
                        It's obvious the opposition and their media allies are convinced they can do whatever they want. This is because many Hongkongers are too afraid of being labeled "anti-democracy" to voice their objections and to demand justice.
                        
                          "Occupy" is the strongest proof so far of this bully mentality. But this time the opposition went too far and lost the public's sympathy. "Occupy" may have won enthusiastic support from biased Western media and governments, thanks to its anti-Beijing agenda, but this is not enough to convince local residents to sacrifice their well-being for the sake of opposition politicians.
                          
                            It is for good reason that the original civil disobedience philosophy maintains "rules" for participants to abide by when protesting. These emphasize that civil disobedience loses its popular support when it begins hurting the public, instead of the specific law it deems unjust.
                            
                              That is exactly the intent of the "Occupy" and why it is doomed to fail. One would imagine the initiators of the protests possess the intellectual capacity to recognize their mistakes and make appropriate changes.
                              
                                But unsurprisingly they are not only making innocent citizens suffer but also trying to divert popular resentment by fomenting a personal vendetta against Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying. This is apparently in the hope that many locals will join them because of whatever problem they blame on the government. But most Hongkongers are not so gullible.
                                
                                  Likewise Western press reports, quoting commentators saying "Occupy" has not done much damage, make the critical mistake of overlooking the financial losses it has caused to ordinary citizens.
                                  
                                    By merely emphasizing that the stock exchange and major international banks are unaffected, while ignoring the suffering of small businesses and the public, the pro-"Occupy" press must take some of the blame for the unpopularity of the illegal movement.
                                    
                                      There is an important question which still needs to be asked. Would the "Occupy Central" cheerleaders have switched sides if the campaign had caused considerable damage - as planned - and hurt the major corporations?
                                      
                                        I'd love to find out but am not holding my breath for a straight answer.
                                        
                                          The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                                          
(HK Edition 10/20/2014 page9)

