
On Sept 28, the Chinese Manufacturers Association of Hong Kong published a press release on behalf of the business community and small and medium-sized enterprises, condemning the organizers of "Occupy Central". 
It stated that the success of implementing universal suffrage in electing the Chief Executive (CE) in 2017 would be a significant milestone in Hong Kong's democratic development. 
It is also an aspiration shared by most Hong Kong people. However, it is one to which some have expressed their opposition through the illegal "Occupy" movement, regardless of what most of the public think. 
Some protesters have even tried to obstruct police officers maintaining order in the course of their duty, by repeatedly charging police cordons. The consequent violent clashes have paralyzed public transportation and obstructed major roads, hindering the normal operation of many businesses - especially those in retailing and tourism. 
As the vice-president of the association, I fully agree with this press release. It is true that "Occupy" will have only a negative impact on Hong Kong, tarnishing the city's international reputation and affecting our economic development. 
More and more people in the city will be inconvenienced, no matter how honorable the protesters intentions may be. 



The media is reporting that there has been a considerable increase in public discontent and hostility towards the protesters because the "umbrella revolution" has spread to so many districts. 
We should all remember how fortunate we are to live in Hong Kong. Our governments have helped to ensure a stable society, implementing a raft of progressive legislation, developing a modern public healthcare system and an excellent education system. 
Hong Kong also enjoys freedom of speech and movement along with many other wonderful attributes which make it a world-class city. 
When other countries are cutting back on welfare payments and worrying about high unemployment, Hong Kong is expanding its poverty alleviation program as well as spending more money on public health and education. 
Despite all this "Occupy" campaign is now devastating Hong Kong. Tourism is a case in point. The National Tourism Administration has recently stopped operators from organizing group tours to Hong Kong. Many other countries have also issued warnings against traveling to the city. It is estimated that during the "golden week" holidays, the tourism industry could suffer losses as high as 40 percent. 
This is not what we want to see in our city. Some seem intent on further disruption. The three "Occupy" organizers have already warned Hong Kong people that they would have to pay a higher price to achieve democracy. 
But they should remember that the constitutional development arrangements outlined by the government are a peaceful and effective way to achieve democracy. They will ultimately enable Hong Kong to achieve universal suffrage in 2017. Therefore, there is no need to attempt to gain democracy through aggressive movements like "Occupy" or to make the city suffer for the demands of a small group of people. 
The SAR government will push ahead with the second round of public consultation on constitutional reform. I hope everyone in society, especially the younger generation, can make pragmatic contributions to Hong Kong's democratic development. But they must do it in a legal, reasonable way to achieve "one person, one vote" in 2017. 
The concrete scheme for universal suffrage can be further modified in accordance with the Basic Law under the framework set by Beijing. This can still be done by listening to the opinions of all parties. By doing this, the public can achieve a unique Hong Kong system of democracy. 
By contrast, the so-called democracy being demanded on the streets will achieve nothing - particularly if those articulating these demands are increasingly resorting to illegal behavior. 
The author is vice-president of the Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 10/06/2014 page5)

