
The 2014 Words of the Year in China are "law" and "anti-corruption" while the Words of the Year worldwide are "lost" and "Malaysia Airlines", according to a decision of the National Language Resources Monitoring and Research Center, the Commercial Press and People's Daily released on Friday. 

The judges evaluated words suggested by more than 230 million people online as most representative of 2014.
The evaluation committee said "govern the country under rule of law" was the most important topic of the year, and the word "law" fully deserved the honor.
"Malaysia Airlines" also topped many lists.
"Law is the most important prerequisite for reform in different fields," the committee said. "When we talk about 'governance of the country', anti-corruption and environmental protection, we are talking about them under the rule of law."
The committee thought the central government's anti-corruption campaign so far had raised public confidence in the country's future and also their lives, which really "injected positive energy into the whole society".
At the same time people didn't give up on the lost MH370. "Malaysia Airlines" expressed the hope of people across the world for amiracle, the committee said.
The organizers also released the Top 10 Catch-phrases, Top 10 Online Expressions and Top 10 New Expressions, including "APEC Blue", "Anti-Ebola" and "Ice Bucket Challenge".
TOP 10 NEW EXPRESSIONS OF THE YEAR
1. New normal
The phrase "new normal" was highlighted at a recent meeting of the Political bureau of the CPC Central Committee to convey the idea that China needs to focus on the quality of its economic development and adapt to a new situation. The new normal will be the hit phrase in the next five years, reflecting the direction of our economic development. Reform and innovation will be the two pillars.
－Chen Fengying, director of the Institute of World Economic Studies at the China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations.
China is becoming the leader of global bilateral and multilateral free trade. In the next three to five years, the new normal of China's opening-up will be China having a greater voice in mapping out international rules. China will be a participant and one of the leaders in international governance.
－Chi Fulin, president of the China Institute of Reform and Development and an adviser to the central government.




Previous Page
1 2 3 4 5 Next Page

Previous Page
1 2 3 4 5 Next Page



<!--
function turnpage(page){  document.all("div_currpage").innerHTML = document.all("div_page_roll"+page).innerHTML;}
-->


