


Bailiffs sent by the High Court to execute a temporary injunction against illegal road-blocking by "Occupy Central" participants in Admiralty arrived at the scene outside CITIC Tower on Tuesday morning. They then proceeded to remove the barriers. After the Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) said the "occupiers" would not obstruct the road clearing process, a small number of them tried briefly to delay this, but they did not persist. This is no doubt an encouraging development as far as the public is concerned. There is reason to believe local residents will welcome the same attitude on the part of the "occupiers" when court injunctions are implemented against illegal blockades in Mong Kok. The implementation will only be a matter of time.
The temporary injunctions show Hong Kong's judiciary will not bow to illegal political pressure and is capable of upholding the law as well as dispensing justice. The illegal "Occupy" campaign appeared intent upon blackmailing the central government at the expense of Hong Kong society. But this is exactly why it failed to win popular support and never will. Indeed, the illegal movement was doomed from its inception because its organizers misread the real situation in Hong Kong when they launched their "color revolution" on China's front door. It is the wrong battle by the wrong means in the wrong place at the wrong time against the wrong opponent.
For the average "occupiers" and young students in particular there is no better time to end the campaign than now due to the court injunctions. Although the "Occupy" organizers are now talking about other "options" instead of continuing with the illegal blockade, there is no indication they will consider abandoning their unconstitutional demands. But whatever they decide to do next is unlikely to win over the majority of Hong Kong people. This is because their confrontational tactics are always aimed at undermining the territory's stability and prosperity. They have demonstrated numerous times over the past 17 years they have no qualms about damaging the public interest. There is no sign they have now changed for the better. All "occupiers" must now choose between heeding the popular will or defying the public interest to the bitter end.
Politics is the art of compromise. Democracy can only be advanced through rational and peaceful negotiations. The 2017 Chief Executive election by universal suffrage according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee is not the last step of Hong Kong's constitutional development. The improvement of election systems is a never-ending endeavor, because it can never be perfect.
(HK Edition 11/19/2014 page7)
 
