


      Now the "umbrella protest" has just about fizzled out let's make a blunt appraisal of which of its supposedly lofty goals has been achieved - the answer is absolutely none. It was an exercise in sheer folly carried out by misguided youth, whose idealistic fervor had been whipped up into the belief they had the power to change the course of political development in Hong Kong. Sadly, they did not realize that they were the unwitting foot soldiers in a nasty game of international mischief-making that can be traced all the way back to London and Washington, but with influential collaborators in Hong Kong society.
      
        The most significant point about the failed protest is that it was a victory for the "silent majority" - the workers who keep Hong Kong ticking, and whose wages support their growing families. The disruptions to traffic proved calamitous for all breadwinners - be they office staff or blue collar workers.
        
          It is doubtful we will ever be able to calculate the harm the protest caused to Hong Kong's image, and its economic well-being.
          
            The youth of Hong Kong must never again allow themselves to become the pawns of international schemers and their local lackeys. These traitors, while supposedly beating their chests in extolling the virtues of democracy, all had their hands out for Next Media boss Jimmy Lai Chee-ying's blatant inducements.
            
              Most importantly there was no serious violence on our streets. Apart from the blows exchanged in clashes between some of the brawnier protesters and angry opponents from the large numbers of wage-earners fearing lay-offs if the disruptions continued and others who wondered how much longer their businesses could sustain the losses.
              
                This is in stark contrast to what has been happening across the globe in the past few years as protest movements gripped country after country always with bloody endings. Among our neighbors, Thailand suffered from several outbreaks of bloody riots that ended in the Thai army seizing control. Its image as a tourist destination nosedived, and with it the country's economy.
                
                  As for Hong Kong, we must congratulate the authorities, particularly the police, for their restraint and patience. It's worth pointing out that, in contrast to similar mass protest actions overseas, there was not a single serious casualty despite the tens of thousands of protesters who camped out on various locations, and at times clashed with their opponents and police. It is also an irrefutable vindication of the use of tear gas which scatters charging crowds without causing lasting physical harm, despite the dramatic smoke and the teary eyes it induces.
                  
                    But we should still maintain our guard against outside forces wishing to destabilize Hong Kong. They could already be re-grouping to plot more civic strife for us.
                    
                      Why are Britain and America meddling in our domestic affairs?
                      
                        It seems that it's all about historic blows to their national pride and prestige. London lost enormous "face" when it had to hand Hong Kong back to China in 1997, grudgingly returning to its rightful owners what had been termed for more than a century the "most lustrous pearl in the British crown." Ever since the handover, diehard imperialists in high places have schemed to foment trouble here by their ongoing sniping deliberately aimed at destabilizing the Hong Kong SAR Government on the pretext of defending and promoting Hongkongers' democratic rights.
                        
                          Turning to the US, it maintains a formidable military presence in Japan and naval force in the Western Pacific as a counter to what it perceives as the China threat. The US intends to turn Hong Kong into a frontline to contain China's rise.
                          
                            Observers of local realpolitik were not surprised at recent revelations that Hong Kong's last British governor Chris Patten offered a British passport to Apple Daily proprietor Jimmy Lai before the 1997 handover, now a major supporter of the student protest and "Occupy Central". One has to wonder about the connections!
                            
                              The author is a seasoned observer of Asian affairs.
                              
(HK Edition 10/13/2014 page9)

