
Editor's note: This is the second part of the author's article on Hong Kong SAR's high degree of autonomy as compared to local governments in Australia and New Zealand. 
Ihave already discussed how Australia and New Zealand achieved a redistribution of power through judicial maneuvers. Now, I would like to share my observations of how these countries do this through their tax systems. 
In these two countries, the central governments receive much more tax revenue than local authorities. In Australia there are 10 types of taxes, of which the federal government collects eight. In New Zealand the central authorities collect corporate, individual income and vehicle-related (toll bridge, toll road, toll tunnel, etc) taxes while local governments only collect property taxes and some smaller levies. This is not surprising for New Zealand because it is a unitary state. In a federal country such as Australia, however, it was made possible by the uniform tax system legislation, which was passed in 1945. The law changed the financial relationship between federal and local governments forever. 
Financial power gives a government real strength - and it is a case of the more, the merrier. The two countries' central governments now find it easier to achieve their goals than before. Tax reforms have allowed them to impose their will upon local authorities through revenue reimbursement of tax revenue and additional measures. In discussions with some state legislative leaders during my stay in Australia, my hosts invariably complained that the federal government is so much more loaded with money so that whenever conflicts of interest arise between federal and state governments, the former often uses its financial strength to dominate the latter. 
But compared with Australia and New Zealand, when it comes to the relationship between the central government and local authorities, the situation in Hong Kong is much better. The central government always shows great sincerity and magnanimity to the SAR. This is demonstrated by the "One Country, Two systems" policy, "Hong Kong people governing Hong Kong" and a "high degree of autonomy". The Basic Law gives Hong Kong independent judicial power and the right to exercise final adjudication. 
This was only reserved for the British Supreme Court during the colonial era. Today, the central government only holds the right to give the ultimate interpretation of the Basic Law through the highest body of state power - the National People's Congress Standing Committee. It has used that power only four times since the handover, while Hong Kong's courts have done this using one-third of the articles of the Basic Law. 
Also, the central government does not collect any taxes in Hong Kong. Even the cost of maintaining the People's Liberation Army Hong Kong Garrison is borne by the central government, unlike in the colonial era, when Hong Kong paid for the British military presence in the territory. I challenge anyone to find me a more considerate central government than the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China. 
It is a great shame some Hong Kong people have no idea how lucky they really are. They are ignorant if they think colonial rule was good for Hong Kong. They are misinformed about Western democracy if they still think it is the answer. This is because they misunderstood the "One Country, Two Systems" policy. They are also wrong to oppose the central government by illegal means. I find it necessary to warn such individuals against taking the central government's authorities' kindness and magnanimity for granted. They must remember that the central government maintains sovereign rule over Hong Kong on behalf of the whole Chinese nation. This is done in accordance with the country's Constitution and the Basic Law of the Hong Kong. Beijing has plenty of effective ways to exercise its overall jurisdiction over Hong Kong. This will always be in the SAR's best interests and will work well for the city and its people. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 




(HK Edition 12/24/2014 page10)

