
ATM operations back to normal 
Services at most automatic teller machines (ATMs) in areas affected by the ongoing student protests have largely returned to normal, according to the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). The authority said only six branches of six banks remained closed as of Tuesday morning, and it has asked banks to resume operations as soon as circumstances permit. It advised customers to pay attention to banks' announcements concerning the affected branches. The HKMA will also give updates on the situation on its website from time to time. 
Retail sales dive amid protests 
Sales at major Hong Kong retail chains plummeted by up to 50 percent during much of the National Day holidays as the "pro-democracy" protests disrupted the shopping season, according to a survey. Sales dropped at least 15 percent in the first five days of the "Golden Week" compared to a year earlier, the Hong Kong Retail Management Association said on Tuesday, citing a survey among its members. Watch and jewelry shops were among the hardest hit. The performance of small-to-medium-sized companies was even worse, with sales plunging by as much as 80 percent, according to the association. 
HK dollar shines after talks pact
The Hong Kong dollar posted its biggest three-day gain since 2012 as city-wide protests showed signs of winding down and the SAR government agreed to begin talks with student leaders. The local currency strengthened 0.02 percent to HK$7.7549 against the greenback as of 5:16 pm in Hong Kong on Tuesday, contributing to a three-day advance of 0.12 percent, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. The yuan rose 0.10 percent to 6.1473 in Hong Kong following a 0.23 percent jump on Monday - its biggest gain in four months. 
Macao gains on HK disturbances 
Total mainland visitor arrivals in Macao during the just ended National Day holidays hit 752,377 - an increase of 16.5 percent year-on-year - as tourists avoided Hong Kong because of the current protests, according to the Macau Government Tourist Office. Jewelry chains in Macao also did a roaring business, with Chow Sang Sang recording a 10 percent jump in sales during the "Golden Week" compared with a year ago. "Our sales in Macao gained partly as more mainland tourists stayed away from Hong Kong," said Dennis Lau, Chow Sang Sang's director of sales. "In Hong Kong, sales at our outlets at Sha Tin, Tuen Mun and Sheung Shui, which are not affected by the protests, also rose from Oct 1 to Oct 5," he said. 
China Daily - Bloomberg 

(HK Edition 10/08/2014 page5)

