



It's over a week since the talks between government officials and representatives of the Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) on Oct 21. Although the "Occupy" movement has yet to end, it has lost its original impetus. This was especially obvious when the occupiers ignored the court's temporary injunction against the obstruction of roads. This irrational behavior alienated the public. 
Consequently when the Alliance for Peace and Democracy started a petition, more than a million Hong Kong citizens expressed their disapproval of the protests. Meanwhile, the latest survey by the Hong Kong Research Association shows 68 percent of citizens oppose "Occupy". Public opinion is so overwhelmingly against the illegal campaign that its three initiators were forced to call off a "public vote" they had planned. 
Although unable to offer a pragmatic solution to the situation, the dialogue has nevertheless provided a good platform for peaceful discussion between the opposing sides. The Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) should have seized this chance and persuaded the students to leave the occupied areas. This would have separated the students, who insist on peaceful demonstrations, from the more extreme protesters. Unfortunately, HKFS missed this unique opportunity. 
However, HKFS seems to believe a "political solution" requires the government to meet their demands regardless of the other views being held in society. They have demanded that the government ask the National People's Congress Standing Committee to retract its Aug 31 decision on the framework of constitutional reform for Hong Kong. They argue that if this is done the political grievances driving the illegal "Occupy" campaign will be satisfied. But this is a very naive, unreasonable demand. 
The rule of law is the fundamental value that makes Hong Kong what it is today - a highly successful international metropolis with a transparent legal system and great freedom to do business. As noted in the Hong Kong Bar Association's Oct 28 statement, "the 'rule of law' is definitely Hong Kong's all-too-precious egg, now very much at risk of being broken by recent events". 
The "Occupy" campaign is clearly illegal; the organizers of the movement even admit as much. What the protesters are demanding - public nomination - clearly contravenes the Basic Law. This explains why "Occupy" cannot endure: It violates the most basic values of Hong Kong. 
I believe that during periods of social unrest, it is a good opportunity for students and citizens to learn about the Basic Law. Only after in-depth understanding of Hong Kong's mini-constitution can we realize its significance and make sensible judgments about vital issues. According to the Basic Law, "the ultimate aim is the selection of the Chief Executive by universal suffrage upon nomination by a broadly representative Nominating Committee in accordance with democratic procedures." The legislated schedule cannot be easily modified because of opinions from a small group of people. 
The Basic Law was drafted by 59 Hong Kong experts from many sectors and also top mainland legal professionals. They did so after collecting the opinions from a large number of people in Hong Kong. This legal document is rigorous enough to protect Hong Kong, guaranteeing that the SAR's freedoms will be maintained for at least half a century. The Basic Law was drafted in the best interests of Hong Kong people. It was designed to protect the city. If this amulet is not shown the respect it deserves, the resulting turbulence and instability will only drive us further from the correct path of democratic development. 
Because universal suffrage is everyone's ultimate aim, we should find an acceptable plan for political reform to guarantee it can be achieved on time. This requires Hongkongers to abandon pointless street demonstrations. These have already greatly disrupted everyday life and economic development. We must return to sensible discussion under the framework outlined by the central government. 
The author is vice-president of the Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 10/30/2014 page10)

