
Traditional and social media both have to enhance their credibility to play a greater role in improving countries' ties
The global media have increasingly proved their usefulness in public diplomacy in recent years. Many governments have competitively engaged in public diplomacy through the media to make their countries look attractive and friendly to foreigners, and help others to understand their positions in the international arena.
The success or failure of public diplomacy through the media, however, can only be judged by its intended audience. The most critical criterion is the media's credibility, which can be achieved through freedom from editorial bias. Only when such media activities are combined with cultural programs and people-to-people exchanges can their synergic effects be maximized.
However, as seen in cases of some cartoons, photographs and video clips, carelessness and negligence can seriously damage the public diplomacy efforts of major powers. To prevent such incidents, public awareness campaigns should encourage every citizen to be part of public diplomacy activities.
The global media are expected to play a constructive role in the expansion of common ground for promoting peace and harmony among people of neighboring countries through consultations with their counterparts in the region.
The global media have become one of many tools a government employs in conducting its public diplomacy programs. The BBC and Voice of America have demonstrated their powerful influence in the foreign policymaking process, and other major media outlets are following suit.
But the global media are not the be all and end all of public diplomacy. Without being reliable enough, the media cannot expect effective results. While a long period and specific strategy are required to yield results, the issue of "journalistic integrity" needs to be addressed in this process.
Each medium has its own body to make decisions on its operation and management. The Broadcasting Board of Governors in the US is one such example. The board is in charge of devising the strategies, policies and goals of the VOA, Worldnet television broadcasts and its surrogate media outlets, including Radio Free and Radio Sawa. Once a basic guideline is set by a governing body of a certain medium, program contents are required to adhere to it.
