 



A public opinion poll conducted by the Hong Kong Institute of Asia-Pacific Studies of the Chinese University of Hong Kong earlier this month shows 63.7 percent of respondents disapprove of the ongoing filibuster by opposition lawmakers against the SAR government's budget funding bill. 
This result is further proof that most Hong Kong residents oppose attempts by radical lawmakers to advance personal agendas by using filibusters to block government policies at society's expense. Many previous opinion polls by other research institutions have shown similar results over the past year or so. 
There is no question filibustering is unpopular in Hong Kong and should be prevented in the best interests of the public. Such poll results also tell lawmakers behind the filibustering that they are almost making themselves a public enemy by continuing with such unpopular antics. Other Legislative Council (LegCo) members should take these poll results as a cue to defend the public interest against filibustering. 
On the question of whether LegCo should amend its legislative procedures to curtail lawmakers' ability to block government budget funding requests with a filibuster, 46.4 percent of the respondents said "yes" and only 27.4 percent said "no", with 23.5 percent "in-between". The gap between "for" and "against" was smaller in this case than for other questions and both sides were short of 50 percent. But it is obvious that people in favor of curbing filibustering outnumber those opposing it. 
LegCo members who take their responsibilities seriously should heed the demands of the public. They should push for measures to limit lawmakers' ability to use filibusters at the expense of society. 
Given that the current sponsors of the filibusters have initiated them before, it is very likely they will not respond to these opinion poll results positively. While that will surprise no one, considering their track record of non-cooperation, their indifference to popular wishes leaves their status as representatives of the public in serious doubt. 
It also gives legitimate voters a very good reason not to support them in the next LegCo election in 2016. Their behavior is an insult to democracy and public dignity. They should be banished from public office for good. 

(HK Edition 05/29/2014 page9)

