 



Some legislative councilors from the "pan-democracy" parties said on Monday they will join a Legislative Council (LegCo) delegation on a visit to Shanghai later this month at the invitation of the central government. This is a step in the right direction and the great majority of Hong Kong residents will no doubt applaud such a positive change of attitude by opposition lawmakers. 
After a number of prominent opposition members of LegCo publicly refused to take part in the upcoming Shanghai trip or made unreasonable demands as a precondition for joining the LegCo delegation, many local residents, as well as commentators, were disappointed by such a counter-productive attitude. They felt some opposition lawmakers' refusal to discuss Hong Kong's constitutional development with central government officials in person was baffling - if not outrageous. 
People generally do not expect a change of heart by die-hard radical parties, given their staunch anti-central government stance and non-cooperative attitudes. But many local residents, as well as the central government, still hope other "pan-democracy" parties will seize the opportunity to exchange views with officials in charge of Hong Kong affairs. Then, they can discuss issues of common concern - especially Hong Kong's constitutional reform. So it is a welcome move by Legislative Councilor Fung Kin-kee (Hong Kong Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood) to join fellow LegCo members on the Shanghai visit. 
The central government has displayed a sincere desire to discuss Hong Kong's political reforms with the opposition camp. It is a shame so many opposition members in LegCo remain uncommitted to the trip. This might suggest they are determined to reject constitutional development plans in accordance with the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) concerning the 2017 Chief Executive Election by universal suffrage. 
It might also show they are set to delay the next phase of Hong Kong's constitutional development as long as they can. This is in total disregard to the public interest of Hong Kong and the rule of law. They have once again demonstrated they care more for power than anything else. It again emphasizes exactly why universal suffrage must be implemented according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC. 

(HK Edition 04/01/2014 page9)

