


      Joseph Sung Jao-yiu, president of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, said recently: "The Hong Kong I was familiar with has gone." I believe he is not the only person who thinks this. Indeed, Hong Kong has been rocked by endless disturbances in recent years as political wrangling over the city's constitutional development has gathered intensity.
      
        As if holding public protests on a daily basis is not enough, the "pan-democracy" parties have taken their disruptive actions to another level. They have launched a series of violent protests inside and around the Legislative Council (LegCo) building in addition to endless filibustering of government bills inside LegCo.
        
          Despite strong support from Beijing, the SAR government has not been able to do its job. Constant obstructions by the opposition camp have made governing Hong Kong, according to existing laws, almost impossible.
          
            It is fair to say a "color revolution" is occurring in Hong Kong. The difference between the "color revolution" here and in other parts of the world is we have not seen the violence that has led to thousands of deaths in these countries. And unlike places such as the Ukraine, Syria and Egypt, foreign meddling in Hong Kong is still covert.
            
              All the indications show that the conflict here will be a protracted one. It is a campaign being waged under the guise of "democracy" and claiming to be peaceful and non-violent. But what it really aims to do is to paralyze the SAR government until the central government concedes defeat and abandons its jurisdiction over Hong Kong. Then, the Hong Kong we all knew will really be dead. That is unless the SAR government fights back with the support of Beijing.
              
                It is interesting to note that Hong Kong would have been a very different place if the central government had been as corrupt as the Kuomintang regime was before its defeat in 1949. Today, the mainland has never been as vibrant and strong. This has been due to the leadership of the Communist Party of China. Why then is Hong Kong not doing as well as it should be with the central government's help? The answer is that many people in the SAR have misjudged the current political situation. They have failed to see the real intentions of the Western powers and their local proxies in Hong Kong. Instead of realizing there is a protracted "war" to seize power in Hong Kong, they have assumed the situation is nothing more than routine political wrangling.
                
                  The opposition camp in Hong Kong has adopted the same strategy as the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) did when it seized power in Taiwan in the 1990s. The DPP relied on aggressive legislative tactics, social movements and propaganda to break the Kuomintang's decades-old stranglehold on government in Taiwan. The opposition camp in Hong Kong today is trying to repeat the DPP's successful strategy. But Hong Kong is not Taiwan.
                  
                    However, the opposition here does enjoy a stronger social foundation than the DPP ever did in Taiwan. The existing political structure in Hong Kong was developed during the time of British colonial rule. It was dominated by a large number of pro-Western professionals in the education sector and in the judiciary. This provides the opposition today with organized support. The DPP did not have this sort of backing in Taiwan.
                    
                      Secondly, the opposition camp controls most of the media in Hong Kong. Therefore, it can spread propaganda and deceive the public.
                      
                        Thirdly, the education system is overwhelmingly pro-West - particularly at primary and secondary school levels. More than half of these schools are funded and controlled by the churches. These religious institutions are inherently anti-communist and oppose the central government. They aim to raise future supporters of the opposition camp for as long as possible.
                        
                          The opposition has no hope of achieving its ultimate goals. But nevertheless, these developments are occurring to the detriment of Hong Kong society.
                          
                            The city's international competitiveness has declined. The economy and people's living standards are suffering because of political unrest. If we cannot find a way to turn this situation around, Hong Kong's economic decline will continue. So, are we really supposed to believe that "unchanged for 50 years" means Hong Kong will not be an organic part of the nation until 2047?
                            
                              The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                              
(HK Edition 07/10/2014 page9)

