



The High Court on Monday authorized the police to step in - if necessary - to remove protesters who obstruct the bailiffs in the execution of the court injunctions. The court's authorization for the bailiffs to obtain assistance from the police is a new addition to the three interim restraining orders, previously granted in October. 
With public anger and frustration reaching boiling point over the illegal "Occupy Central" movement, calls for the police to clear up barricaded areas in Mong Kok and Admiralty are gaining momentum. The so-called civil disobedience movement and the occupation of key thoroughfares have to end immediately because, among many issues, the rule of law and due administration of justice risk being eroded and undermined. 
Live TV coverage has frequently shown certain die-hard protesters openly disobeying and flouting court orders by obstructing others from dismantling road barricades. Such behavior constitutes contempt of court, a serious offense. It shows willful disregard for the authority, justice and dignity of the court. 
The rule of law is naturally a cornerstone of Hong Kong's many successes. To fully honor the rule of law - even if a defendant wants to contest a court order - they should first comply with it instead of defying it, and seek to appeal against it, at a later date, in accordance with the law. 
There is no question that democracy is a laudable goal, but the pursuit of democracy should never take priority over the rule of law, and certainly not destroy it. "Occupy" protests have posed unprecedented challenges to the police force, as claimed by Andy Tsang, commissioner of police. Perhaps this is exactly what "Occupy" perpetrators want in their push to make Hong Kong ungovernable, forcing the whole of Hong Kong into paying a hefty price, as the "Occupy" movement starts to accelerate the decline of the economy. 
As Chief Secretary Carrie Lam pointed out on Tuesday, the government has already shown its sincerity during the two-hour meeting it held with student leaders last month. Unfortunately, the government's conciliatory move has not been reciprocated with equal sincerity. 
Obviously, if the Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) still insists on sticking to its guns the situation leaves no more room for dialogue in the foreseeable future. 
Judging by the embarrassment of its thinning ranks in the "Occupy" zone, HKFS would be wise to respect the High Court's latest decision. The longer the protests drag on, the less the chances of achieving democracy. There is no doubt about it: Adhering to the law is the only way forward. 

(HK Edition 11/12/2014 page10)

