
Those glittering lights that used to brighten up the streets and buildings during the festive season were gone. Sensing the glum mood precipitated by a mix of misguided students, deceitful politicians, devious schemers and brutish hooligans, who caused mayhem on the streets for months, shopping mall owners have been scrimping on decorating their premises to reflect the festive spirit. 
Absent was the tall and brightly decorated Christmas tree that used to adorn the podium of Times Square in Causeway Bay at this time in the past every year. Gone too were the Christmas lights that bedecked almost every harbor-front building from Central to North Point. 
The crowd at Lan Kwai Fong, one of Hong Kong's prime entertainment enclaves, this Christmas Eve was significantly smaller than in past years. The subdued spirit seems to have extended to the New Year. Several organizers have called off the New Year's Eve countdown events for fear of trouble caused by demonstrators mingled in the crowds. 
Indeed, those louts, hiding under the deceitful banner of democracy, have succeeded in nothing but making Hong Kong people unhappy. Like the Grinch in the story, many of them bear a grudge against society because of their own failings. Now they are taking it out on their fellow citizens at the behest of the equally pathetic politicians from the opposition parties. 
It's not known how these perpetrators of the illegal "Occupy Central" movement celebrated Christmas with their families and whether they feel any sense of guilt for spoiling the fun of many other hard-working and law-abiding Hong Kong people. 
To most Hong Kong people, even those who are not religious, Christmas means time for celebrations and partying. It's also time for sharing, a tradition of special meaning to Hong Kong dating back to the great ghetto fire in Shek Kip Mei on Christmas Eve in 1953. 
Hong Kong was one of the poorest cities in the region in those days. But the outpouring of sympathy for victims of the fire and generous donations from fellow citizens are embedded in Hong Kong people's collective memory. From that momentous event was born the widely shared notion among Hong Kong people that they were all in the same boat. 
Such a spirit was captured in the beautiful tune and well-crafted lyrics of the song, Under the Lion Rock, made popular in the 1980s by the late pop-star Roman Tam. Christmas was delightful, beautiful and deeply symbolic in those days. 
The grim Christmas of 2014 contrasted so sharply and depressingly against those in the past. It served as a reminder that the people of Hong Kong cannot afford to allow a small group of troublemakers to undermine the traditional values that form the bedrock of society. 
Hong Kong people must take a firm stand against the Grinches and regain Christmas and all the good things it stands for. 




(HK Edition 12/30/2014 page10)

