



The clearance of the last occupation site at Causeway Bay is set to take place today (Monday). It signifies the illegal campaign known as "Occupy Central", which has done a lot of damage to Hong Kong for more than two month, is finally over. The rule of law has prevailed, but the conspirators behind the failed attempt to turn Hong Kong into an independent political entity will not surrender or give up. They will no doubt try again, maybe in a different way. 
It is time to find out how the organizers of the illegal movement were able to fool so many people with their lies about democracy and convince them to participate in occupying the streets at expense of Hong Kong society as a whole. It is particularly the important to set the record straight about Hong Kong's constitutional development as a special administrative region of the People's Republic of China. One of the reasons why so many people went along with "Occupy" is that they did not understand the relationship between the Hong Kong SAR and the central government, which holds the authority to determine how the city's constitutional reform should proceed. 
In order to maintain Hong Kong's stability and prosperity as a capitalist society, the central government led by late leader Deng Xiaoping put forward the unprecedented "One Country, Two Systems" principle when the country resumes it sovereign rule over Hong Kong. "One Country" is the basis of "Two Systems", which refers to the socialist system of the mainland and Hong Kong's capitalist system. In no way does it suggest Hong Kong can decide how its Chief Executive will be elected. 
It has been 17 years since the city returned to the motherland. The city and its 7 million residents are now more closely linked to the mainland than ever before. In the early days of the illegal "Occupy" campaign one of the slogans of the protestors made the claim: "Fate in our own hands". Little did they realize Hong Kong's fate will always be tied to that of the nation. That is why the great majority of Hong Kong residents refused to support "Occupy", which was a direct challenge of the central government's constitutional authority. 
All members of Hong Kong society should keep in mind their well-being will be tied to that of the 1.3 billion mainland people. No matter what dirty tricks the instigators of the failed "Occupy" movement try to play next, they stand no chance of success because their goal will not change and that means they can never win sufficient popular support. 

(HK Edition 12/15/2014 page6)

