


      The Most Reverend Paul Kwong, archbishop of Hong Kong Sheng Kung Hui has been talking sense lately. The archbishop is concerned about the proposed "Occupy Central" campaign. During a recent Sunday service he told his congregation that confrontation was not the best way to express frustration. He said people needed to carefully analyze all they are being told about politics.
      
        Kwong also encouraged the faithful to follow Jesus Christ's example and search for "inner peace".
        
          However, there were those who were unhappy with Kwong for expressing his disapproval of "Occupy Central".
          
            The Apple Daily was quick to criticize the archbishop for his comments. In an editorial, the paper accused him of showing "indifference" to students arrested by the police for illegal assembly following the July 1 march. The Apple Daily also criticized the archbishop for saying the organizers of "Occupy Central" "should have told the students to bring their foreign domestic helpers along".
            
              The paper also voiced its displeasure at Kwong for saying he is "having reservations about the use of civil disobedience to win universal suffrage as well as with 'Occupy Central', itself".
              
                Let's be frank here. Kwong spoke the truth. He expressed views which others are afraid to say. His courage and honesty have won the admiration and support of more people than the opposition camp could ever muster. The archbishop stands out as a man with a clear conscience who is admired in Christian circles in Hong Kong.
                
                  Kwong clearly sees the hypocrisy behind recent political shenanigans together with potential problems and suffering "Occupy Central" may bring to Hong Kong. His advice to the students that they should "think carefully and independently about the consequences of 'Occupy Central'" is precisely the advice their parents should be giving them.
                  
                    Kwong's words may be hard for some to accept. But many young people will come to appreciate such blunt honesty when they get hurt, arrested or acquire a criminal record as a result of their actions during the "Occupy Central" campaign. This is what is at risk through involvement in such illegal activities.
                    
                      The Apple Daily got it wrong when it accuses Kwong of indifference vis--vis the arrests of students. If he was genuinely indifferent he would have kept his own council. Kwong not only spoke out, but he did so contrary to Cardinal Joseph Zen's example - who urged young people to participate in the illegal "Occupy Central" campaign.
                      
                        Kwong decided to speak out against "Occupy Central" because he cannot bear the thought of watching young students being used as scapegoats by a small number of troublemakers opposing the central government.
                        
                          As for his comment about "telling students to bring their foreign domestic helpers along", this was an impromptu remark. A remark made in typical Hong Kong humor with reference to some students' petty complaints about being hungry and having to wait too long for their lawyers to respond following their arrests. Did they expect the police to meet the personal demands of every one of the 511 protesters they had detained, individually?
                          
                            It costs our society hundreds of thousand dollars of taxpayer's money to send young people to university. Why do they have to upset their parents by getting involved in a controversial campaign such as "Occupy Central"? This is a question which cannot be answered merely by claiming it is part of a campaign of "civil disobedience".
                            
                              Kwong is absolutely right in saying young people are incapable of independent thinking and need to search instead for inner peace, because these young people don't really know what they are doing.
                              
                                So many questions remain unanswered. Is it possible that "Occupy Central" could be peaceful? Who is responsible for setting "international standards of true democracy"? Can a "Chief Executive gutsy enough to oppose the central authorities" guarantee a fulfilling future for 7 million people?
                                
                                  These are complex questions. But at the very least, young people should realize that civil disobedience does not mean breaking any law which you feel like breaking. There are lines which shouldn't be crossed. If these young people cross them they will pay the price by ruining their futures and breaking their parents' hearts.
                                  
                                    The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                                    
(HK Edition 07/16/2014 page9)

