


      The "pan-democrat" camp has changed its demands for a "triple-track format" that includes public and party nomination to comply with unspecified "international standards" regarding the election of the Chief Executive (CE) by universal suffrage. The shift may resemble a retreat, but the demands remain problematic because no one can define "international standards".
      
        An immediate question about "international standards" is whether universal suffrage, in compliance with these standards, does actually guarantee "one person, one vote". In terms of an electoral system, neither the UK prime minister nor the US president are elected by "one person, one vote" - either position can be won by someone with fewer popular votes. For example, the US presidential election system dictates that a candidate who wins the most popular votes does not necessarily win more electoral votes, which ultimately determine who becomes president.
        
          In the 2000 presidential election, Democratic Party candidate Al Gore won more popular votes but lost in certain key states to Republican rival George W. Bush, who eventually became the US president with more electoral votes. The US Electoral College System (ECS) evidently operates in violation of the democratic principles of "one person, one vote" and "he who wins the highest number of popular votes wins the election". Since the ECS obviously falls short of this fundamental principle of universal suffrage, we can safely say the US brand of democracy is not a perfect example to be followed.
          
            Now let's take a look at the British electoral system. The prime minister of the UK is usually the head of the dominant party in the House of Commons or the leader of a multi-party coalition, united as a governing body. However, the party that has won the most seats in the House of Commons may not have won the most popular votes in the parliamentary elections. The British electoral system is such that a party may win in some constituencies by large margins, but lose in some others. This results in the party winning the most popular votes, but not the most seats in the House of Commons. This is because it lost in constituencies with more lower house seats than those in which it won. This technicality is obviously at odds with the fundamental principle of universal suffrage, as we know it. It is unlikely to change any time soon. The UK is not the only country practicing this type of parliamentary democracy - which allows multiple lower house minority parties to join forces (and seats) in outnumbering the majority party and forming a united government. That means minority interests can override the mainstream popular will and pick a head of government under such electoral systems.
            
              As for public nomination, most countries that have adopted this practice are in Africa, Central Asia and Eastern Europe (former member states of the Soviet Union). Yet certain "better developed" countries, such as Finland, South Korea and Iceland, also exercise public nomination. However these are greatly outnumbered by those countries that don't. It is safe to say public nomination is not standard practice in the world today. I only wonder what proof the "pan-democrats" have that an "international standard" actually exists.
              
                Li Fei, chairman of the HKSAR Basic Law Committee of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC), pointed out the flaws of the "international standards" claim when the opposition camp adopted it as its battle cry. He asked why the "pan-democrats" had not specified what those "international standards" exactly are and how widely they are applied. Of course no clear answer has yet been provided, because the "pan-democrats" don't have an answer. All they have is a bunch of unrealistic, impracticable "ideals" which contravene the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC.
                
                  The reality is that the political structure of any society cannot function outside the boundaries of its local history, constitutional framework and social conventions.
                  
                    No electoral system is universally applicable. Hong Kong is a special administrative region under the direct jurisdiction of the central government of the People's Republic of China. It follows the "One Country, Two Systems" principle and selects its CE through consultation or democratic election. The CE-elect must be appointed by the central government and he or she must be accountable to the central government as well as to the SAR. It is a unique case and is clearly appropriate for Hong Kong.
                    
                      The author is vice-chairman of the Hong Kong Association of Young Commentators.
                      
(HK Edition 09/30/2014 page5)

