






China Post will issue a set of stamps on Friday marking the 110th anniversary of the birth of former leader Deng Xiaoping. Long Wei / For China Daily
President Xi Jinping warned on Wednesday against blindly copying the experience of other countries amid China's ongoing reforms.
His warning came at a symposium in Beijing, the latest in several high-profile activities marking the 110th anniversary of the birth of late leader Deng Xiaoping, which falls on Friday.





How China honors its late leaders
Party and State leaders nationwide give the highest honor to the commemoration of Chairman Mao Zedong's birth, according to news website thepaper.cn. 
For anniversaries of the birth of the nation's leaders who have died, Party and State leaders hold memorial meetings. 
First official biography of Deng 
The official biography and collected works of late leader Deng Xiaoping were published on Wednesday, ahead of the 110th anniversary of his birth on Friday. 
The Collected Works of Deng Xiaoping (1949-74) presents his thoughts on the development of the country and the Communist Party of China. Published by the Party Literature Research Office of the CPC Central Committee, the two volumes also relate Deng's experiences during the "cultural revolution" (1966-76). 
The book took publishers eight years to finish and details how Chairman Mao Zedong and Deng kept in touch by letters during the "cultural revolution". 
Tributes in Deng's hometown 
As the 110th anniversary of the birth of Deng Xiaoping draws near, memorial activities from the central and local governments to honor the late leader are escalating. 
In his hometown of Guang'an, Sichuan province, two large-scale performances honoring Deng's achievements took place in a local stadium on Aug 16 and 17. 
The city government also recently renovated Deng's former residence. It and a memorial hall will be open to the public on Aug 22 free of charge. 
China Daily 
"We will try our best to reform areas that are weak and unsound and learn from the good experience of the international community," Xi said.
"But we will never blindly copy the experience of other countries, let alone absorb bad things from them." 
China would never belittle itself or forget its roots, Xi said, adding that history had shown that the only way to solve problems in China was for the country to do so in its own way, based on its "own reality". 
All seven members of the Political Bureau Standing Committee of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China attended the symposium in the Great Hall of the People.
Observers said the large number of activities held nationwide recently underscored the leadership's determination to carry out reform that was appropriate for China's needs, just as Deng had done.
Deng emerged as leader in the years after the death of Chairman Mao Zedong in 1976. His sweeping economic reforms changed the face of China over two decades and saw it emerge as an economic giant.
Xi said Deng's most important political and theoretical legacy was socialism with Chinese characteristics, which the Party and people created under Deng's leadership.
Wu Hui, professor of Party-building at the CPC Central Committee's Party School, said Xi's remarks highlighted his vigilance against "subversive mistakes" during reforms.
"China is at a crossroads, with both achievements and problems. The leadership aims to make full use of, and improve, its socialism without allowing populism or nationalism to sabotage democracy and the rule of law, or totally copying Western systems," he said.
Professor Xie Chuntao from the Party School said the opportunity to commemorate Deng was a chance to publicly demonstrate confidence in new breakthroughs. 
"As reform enters the 'deep water zone', we need the daring spirit of Deng's era," Xie said.
Contact the writer at zhaoshengnan@chinadaily.com.cn
 
