 
Young people - even teenagers - have become more politically active in recent years. This was particularly evident during recent demonstrations, where most of the frontline protesters have been young students - from universities and high schools. It is great that the young care about society and want to fight for democracy by getting involved in politics. Indeed, I encourage this. 
But it is also important that young people get to know more about these contentious issues. 
The real problem with the current situation in Hong Kong is that many young people don't have a thorough understanding of the issues they are protesting about. They don't really understand these complex issues. 
Politics is always fraught with difficulties. Therefore, knowledge of history is crucial when judging right from wrong. Without an intelligent understanding, independent thought and rational analysis, young people can easily be misled by others. 



The ancient Chinese valued the importance of studying history. This is because studying the past will make you knowledgeable. From this perspective, the current education system in the SAR does not place enough emphasis on learning about the history of the country or of Hong Kong. As a result, many students are ignorant about past events in Hong Kong - let alone things which happened on the mainland. Consequently, the history of Hong Kong's handover and even the contents of Basic Law are vague, even ambiguous, to them because they have never studied them in any depth. 
They should remember that the Basic Law allows for the introduction of universal suffrage in Hong Kong. It will happen. They should also remember that during the 150 or so years of rule by the United Kingdom, it was the governor of Hong Kong who held power. Officials who ran the colony were all directly nominated by the British government. In those days, universal suffrage was just a dream. Now, under Chinese sovereignty, we are finally approaching a time when universal suffrage will become a reality. Despite this, some young protesters still chant slogans, demanding "democracy" and displaying the flag of British Hong Kong! This shows a lack of understanding of the past. 
In every country in the world, national education is part of the school curriculum. But Hong Kong's education system is not only deficient in teaching history, it is also lacking in providing students with national education. This deprives them of the opportunity to gain a balanced understanding of China. Consequently, the media is inclined to focus only on negative news from the mainland. Some politicians also try to demonize China. Sadly many Hong Kong students resist being identified as "Chinese" because they believe there are negative things associated with this. But these attitudes can change if students obtain a better understanding of relations between Hong Kong and the mainland by studying more Chinese history. If they try to communicate more with people from the mainland then I believe their attitudes will be more balanced and less biased. 
We should be aware of the many benefits the mainland has brought to Hong Kong over the years. Every Hong Kong person should acknowledge that even during the most difficult times, the mainland has shown care and concern for Hong Kong people. For example, in the 1960s, when Hong Kong suffered water shortages, the central government mobilized over 10,000 people. They tunneled through the mountains to transport water from the East River to Hong Kong. 
Despite suffering a prolonged food shortage, the mainland also insisted on shipping its best-quality vegetables, meat and other products to Hong Kong on a daily basis. Many are not aware of this. More recently, when the economy of Hong Kong was suffering the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis in 1997-98 and SARS in 2003, the central government supported Hong Kong. It implemented a number of measures beneficial to Hong Kong. The city has also benefited from many of the economic reforms and initiatives adopted by the central government. 
Hong Kong became what it is today as a result of this help from the motherland. Hong Kong was, is, and always will be an inseparable part of China. In future, the development of Hong Kong will be even more integrated with that of the country. The younger generation will only be able to fully make the best of future opportunities when they realize this. 
The author is vice-president of the Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 07/18/2014 page9)

