


      The Hong Kong police on Tuesday showed their ability to do their job well, after thousands of officers ensured the authorized July 1 mass rally proceeded without any serious incidents.
      
        Some organizers of the annual event, however, were not content to have peaceful march. They staged an unauthorized sit-in in Chater Garden after the procession ended on Tuesday night. Given the illegal nature of their actions the authorities began to remove them early on Wednesday to prevent a traffic jam during morning rush hours.
        
          Some 511 protestors were taken to the Police College in Wong Chuk Hang to be booked and then released. Police once again proved their professionalism and efficiency in maintaining order in Hong Kong. Their response to the illegal gathering was vital to ensure the well-being of Hong Kong residents as well as the rule of law.
          
            As expected, some of those removed from Chater Garden and booked for illegal assembly included several prominent opposition politicians, who accused the police of using excessive force. Their complaints are not only groundless but show their contempt for the rule of law.
            
              The rule of law is vital to Hong Kong's success - as it is to the success of any developed Western society. A US State Department spokeswoman told a press conference that the US supports Hong Kong's democratic development in accordance with the Basic Law. That is a welcome statement to Hong Kong residents and indeed to all Chinese people.
              
                Some may wonder what took the US so long to recognize the value of the rule of law to Hong Kong after the opposition camp has done so much to undermine it over the past 17 years - often with Washington's blessing. So, it is better late than never that the US accepts this. But the reality is that even the mighty US has to accept that democracy will not survive in Hong Kong without the rule of law.
                
                  The sit-in, without police permission, was a deliberate violation of the law and an open invitation for police to act accordingly. Those who say the police were wrong to remove illegal protesters from Chater Garden early on Wednesday should be condemned for encouraging acts harmful to Hong Kong's interests - including human rights and democracy.
                  
(HK Edition 07/03/2014 page9)

