 
Until he typed the last word of his inspirational book China Developing: Cultural Identity of Emerging Societies, George Fusun Ling must have endured agony and ecstasy during his lifelong search for solutions to the puzzles of human development. A Yale- and Oxford-graduated doctor of philosophy, Ling came to "respect many deep-seated ideas and values upheld in the West" but saw "how unsuccessful those values and ideas had played out socioeconomically as well as culturally in some of the developing countries". 
Powering Ling's quest was his larger dream, which was "to establish decency, dignity, order, hope and ecologically sustainable prosperity in the underdeveloped as well as in the developing countries" and to realize the Confucian ideal of Grand Harmony. He kept probing the classics and compared notes with present-day ups and downs for inspiration. Thus in the book he refers to more than 100 authors and thinkers such as Adam Smith, Antony Alcock, Brian Burtch, Charles L.S. Montesquieu, Evelyn Kallen, Mary Dowell-Jones, Reinhold Niebuhr and Socrates. And he articulated his wisdom in fresher and sharper arguments, more insightful and most convincingly persuasive as well. 
The spiritual odyssey starts by examining the concept of personhood, "because that concept's implication is far-reaching". As Ling dives into meditative critique on the basic human existential experience, he soon encounters discrepancies in the understanding of individualism, human rights, freedom, equality, democracy and law between developing societies and Western countries. 
The individual in Western political thinking is understood as the basic autonomous unit of a society, which is actualized in the United States by the top priority given to the exercising of individual political rights. "When that priority gets translated into foreign policy, it means that America has been promoting America-style democracy worldwide as the number one priority." In China, however, the individual is "a free-spirited moral person" with principles and character and is "always conscious of his/her bond with, and indebtedness to, that community". 
After painful and prolonged reflections upon the pros and cons of Asian democratic process, he realizes that "Western democracy does not cure all ills, and even less is it an end in itself so that a developing country should pursue it at all cost". He believes that "while a person's rights and freedom are important, priority should be given to human rights instead of individual political rights, and to freedom from want, instead of freedom of choice". 
Illuminating paths emerge once illusions are dropped. "We need to acclimatize democracy with deep-seated and most cherished indigenous cultural values in order for it to survive the test of history," he says. Moreover, as globalization sweeps the world, economic disparity challenges humanity and varied differences jumpstart perspectives of international equality. "The call for equality is not to ignore differences, but to respect differences, and treat others as equals in spite of differences." 
But without universal respect for law, Ling finds any talk of respect for the individual person, of freedom, human rights, equality and democracy will come to nought. "Even though this concept of law might not be in one's tradition, one should treasure that concept and embrace it" and try to reform the legal system so that laws become instruments of emancipation for all members of that society. 
In the end he concludes, "most important of all is that a society needs to carry with it a set of values accepted by the people of a particular country as significant enough to produce a cohesiveness and an esprit de corps to give momentum in development." 
Ling proposes a two-pronged approach to attain a shared set of values: a serious analysis of the concepts important for development and a search for one's cultural identity. 
He explains that cultural identity means identifying the deep-seated and most cherished values in a culture, those embodied in the myths, legends, narratives, the symbols and the psyche of the people. "We must try to dissect and understand the various subtle meanings of the concepts at more than face value, and try to understand them with one's cultural identity in order for development to have the support of the general population." 
Ling exemplifies this undertaking by surgically scrutinizing a century of sufferings and struggles that give rise to the modern Chinese cultural identity. "At least what is evident today is that there are the Chinese ancient values, the Marxist social analysis and social compassion, and the contribution of Western liberalism like the universal respect for law, the modern practice of the skeleton of democratic process." He has the vision that those "three important strands of cultural heritages will converge like the confluence of three torrential streams merging into a mighty roaring river" of what might be called "Chinese-style socialism". 
Finally, where dwells his pride and delight, "The purpose of the book, then, is my attempt to see if there is any way the modernization of other developing countries could be a shorter and less painful one." 
Sadly, Ling passed away last year, but his messianic foresight, committed pursuit and noble findings for ways in which global development can benefit the whole of humankind remain with us, shining a light on the path ahead. 
The author is a senior writer with China Daily. wenjia@chinadaily.com.cn 

(China Daily USA 02/17/2014 page12)

