


As the "Occupy Central" movement is entering its second week, its momentum is subsiding drastically and losing direction after an intense stand-off that has at times erupted into violence. As television coverage shows on Monday that key thoroughfares were cleared, the besieged government complex reopened, and crowds of protesters have dwindled to their lowest level since the campaign was launched. 
Needless to say, "Occupy" is bound to fail because of its illegal and destructive nature. But the week-long stand-off has wreaked havoc on the city's transport system and taken a heavy toll on businesses. Moreover, Hong Kong's global image has been severely tarnished due to the unnecessary chaos. According to a conservative estimate, the campaign has resulted in economic losses of a staggering HK$350 billion - equivalent to HK$50,000 for each Hongkonger. As a matter of fact, many in business community and other sectors are preparing to make a claim against the "Occupy" organizers. 
It is now high time to ask: Who should bear legal responsibility for the political farce which has almost plunged Hong Kong into a bottomless abyss? The answer is obvious: the three key organizers who should be prosecuted for criminal liability. 
Benny Tai Yiu-ting was the first person to suggest the idea of staging "Occupy". In an article entitled "The most lethal weapon of civil disobedience" published in a local newspaper on Jan 16, 2013, he advocated use of a "civil disobedience" action to fight for "true democracy" with up to 10,000 protesters unlawfully recruited to block Central. Tai's proposal has gained the support of the other two - Chan Kin-man and Chu Yiu-ming. Two months later on March 27, 2013, the three organizers unveiled the "Occupy" manifesto in which they officially admitted the campaign would break the law. 
Quite literally, "Occupy" attempts to forcibly take possession of geographic space. In a law-abiding society like ours, no one is allowed to forcibly take control of an area. We all know Hong Kong's many successes have been built on its reputation for being safe, orderly and law-abiding. Law and order constitute the cornerstone of our stability and prosperity under which every citizen should behave within the boundaries of the law. There is no justification for anyone for whatever reasons, including "civil disobedience", to be above the law. Therefore, the "Occupy" organizers should ultimately be made accountable for their radical and illegal acts. 
(HK Edition 10/07/2014 page10)
