
Now police and bailiffs have cleared the protest areas in Admiralty, where the "main stage" was located and the initial "Occupy" action started, the protesters know the days of the "Occupy Central" campaign are numbered. Only a relatively small area in Causeway Bay now remains to be cleared. Then the public can return to their normal way of life. 
The protesters say that although the actual "Occupy" action is coming to an end, they are not giving up. The Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) say they are highly likely to return next year, and that they will continue their fight for democracy through boycotts, disobedience and obstruction - probably with even greater ferocity. 
Regrettably, they do not appear to have learnt the lesson for which the Hong Kong public has paid such a high price. The 75-day ordeal would have been worthwhile if Hong Kong had emerged more enlightened and more down-to-earth. I sincerely hope they and their supporters will reflect on what they have done. 



They should remember that the only legitimate goal is to strive for a better future for Hong Kong. They really need to ask themselves: were they doing Hong Kong a service, or a disservice, in occupying Hong Kong's busiest areas, blocking traffic, and particularly in their opposition to the central government? 
Many protesters keep saying they are only striving for "genuine universal suffrage", not for independence. Many deny they are opposed to the central government. But their actions tell a different story. Anyone who visited the protest areas recently would have seen posters challenging the legitimacy of the Communist Party of China (CPC). The leaders of "Occupy" openly said they were opposed to the government of Hong Kong and the political system on the mainland. This can only serve to raise the alarm in Beijing and reduce any chance of Beijing offering concessions over the threshold for the nomination of the Chief Executive (CE). 
The most important lesson for the protesters to learn is that treating Beijing as an enemy, instead of a friend, will only lead Beijing to treat them as enemies. And Beijing will not allow its enemies to rule Hong Kong. Confrontational, antagonistic tactics will fail. Beijing, of course, not only wants anyone who vies for the post of CE to avoid such tactics, it also wants them to love the country and to love Hong Kong. Any aspiring candidate for the role of CE, possessing such attitudes, will never gain approval from the Nominating Committee. 
Many protesters say they do love both Hong Kong and the nation, but they do not love the Communist Party. In saying this, they are saying they do not accept the present regime on the mainland. But socialism on the mainland is an important ingredient of the "One Country, Two Systems" framework. If someone is against the "One Country, Two Systems" principle, that person cannot be acceptable as a candidate for CE of the special administrative region under the framework of the "One Country, Two Systems". 
Loving the Communist Party does not mean you must agree with every policy adopted by the party. It is perfectly acceptable, indeed, entirely reasonable, if a person finds fault with a policy adopted by any government. Criticizing a policy and giving reasons why a policy may not be good is actually an act of love. But challenging the legitimacy of the regime is certainly not. 
The occupiers may believe the political system on the mainland to be undemocratic. But democracy does not have to mean party rotation as is practiced in the West. China has improved its system of governance over the years and is now more responsive to the needs of its citizens. 
There has been rotation of leaders at the top, and as Eric Li so persuasively argued, the CPC is a meritocracy. It has developed a unique way of basing its selection of national leaders upon merit. The protesters may not view this as the best system, but they must respect the country's new experiment of an alternative form of democracy. Only time will tell which system works better. But in Hong Kong there must be respect for the "One Country, Two Systems" principle. 
Many protesters keep referring to past mistakes of the CPC, but actually CPC has learnt from its mistakes. In the latest Pew Center report (2014), 87 percent of respondents said they were satisfied with the way things were going in China while only 8 percent were dissatisfied. On the other hand, only 33 percent of respondents in the US were satisfied with how things were going there, while 62 percent said they were dissatisfied. 
If Hong Kong people show they accept the "One Country, Two Systems" principle, genuine universal suffrage will be implemented, otherwise, it will be out of the question, and there will be more trouble down the road. 
The author is director of the Centre for Public Policy Studies at Lingnan University. 

(HK Edition 12/15/2014 page6)

