



Talking on a radio show on Thursday, Liu Pak-wai, former pro-vice-chancellor of the Chinese University of Hong Kong and now a consultant for the Our Hong Kong Foundation think tank established by former chief executive (CE) Tung Chee-hwa a few days ago, sincerely advised the younger generation to broaden their horizons so as to clearly see the reality. 
The renowned emeritus professor of economics sighed with emotion, remembering back to 1970s when Hong Kong was still under British colonial rule. Then the Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS), founded in 1958, had faithfully adhered to its motto of "comprehending the motherland and caring for society". Unfortunately, the HKFS nowadays no longer follows in its founders' footsteps. 
Instead, the HKFS - currently comprising the student unions of eight tertiary educational institutions - is actually at the vanguard of the ongoing "Occupy" movement. These post-80s and 90s kids have even replaced the "pan-democrats" by taking the leading role in the so-called civil disobedience. 
Admittedly, these young people have passion and idealism, and by all accounts, most of them are good-natured. However, ideals and faith alone are insufficient to make it function for the benefit of society. Students need knowledge and critical thinking in order to better appreciate democracy. 
It is agreed that democracy is a dream shared by the society as a whole, but this needs more time to cultivate and take root. Often, democracy is beautiful in theory, but can in practice prove to be a dismal failure. This can be seen not only in the Middle East and Asia, but even in mature European and American democracies. 
Judging by the words and deeds of the demonstrating students, there is a worrying lack of understanding of how "One Country, Two Systems" functions, despite their burning enthusiasm for democratic politics. A case in point is their constant advocacy of public nomination for the selection of aspiring CE candidates. The idea is legally flawed and politically naive, as it does not conform to the Basic Law. 
Besides, one distinctive quality evidently missing from the makeup of key HKFS members, if they are to fulfill their political potential, is patriotism. Deng Xiaoping once told a delegation of leaders in Hong Kong: "There is indeed a line and criterion on Hong Kong people governing Hong Kong They must be patriots." He defined the meaning of "patriot": respects the (Chinese) nation, sincerely supports the resumption of sovereign rule over Hong Kong by the motherland and does nothing that will harm Hong Kong's prosperity and stability. 
The younger generation is one of the most important elements of Hong Kong society. They represent the future direction of Hong Kong society. As Tung Chee-hwa recently pointed out, "students are Hong Kong's future, and today's students could become Hong Kong's CEs in the future." Instead of occupying the streets, students should have won over the heart of the public by lawful means, and focus on reality, not idealism. 

(HK Edition 11/14/2014 page10)

