



As Hong Kong lumbers through the illegal "Occupy Central" movement - allegedly led by the Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS), a large-scale anti-Occupy rally co-organized by the Hong Kong United Youth Association and some 10 youth groups representing a broad cross-section of society took place at Chater Garden in Central on Tuesday. 
This indicates that the HKFS is not necessarily representative of the younger generation - not to mention the majority of Hong Kong society. 
Coincidentally, according to media reports on Monday, a record-breaking 1.85 million plus signatures, received by the anti-"Occupy" Alliance for Peace and Democracy during its week-long petition, speak loud and clear - the vast majority of Hong Kong people are in no mood for street politics. They definitely want restoration of the rule of law, because the "Occupy" movement has disrupted the lives of innocent citizens, causing immeasurable damage and inconvenience to all sectors of Hong Kong society. 
In fact, most youngsters born and bred in Hong Kong have passion and idealism. They recognize that democracy is a laudable goal. But however respectful and justified one's ideals are, they have to be achieved by lawful and rational means. Like their self-sufficient parents and grandparents, they should move up the social ladder by studying and working hard in a stable, thriving society. They should not sit on their hands waiting for some contemptible opposition politicians to ruin their futures. This explains why clear-minded youth last night broke their silence and condemned the "Occupy" movement, which has been dragging on for six weeks. 
For those young protesters still hanging around day and night in Admiralty, Causeway Bay and Mong Kok, it is time to remember that the "Occupy" campaign, under the banner of democracy, has lost any aura it once had due to its destructive nature. 
Those young souls were mere toddlers in 1997 at the time of the handover, and by all accounts are good-natured, but have been cajoled into believing they are fighting in the streets for the greater good of Hong Kong. This is a monstrous deception. The city's future rests on its role as a go-between in many sectors, particularly the finance industry, between the mainland and foreign countries. If the intermediary is unreliable and keeps stirring up trouble, the mainland will reduce its reliance, and policy of preference towards Hong Kong. This downward trend would in turn harm the city's job market, causing its once vibrant economy to become volatile. It's time for protesters to take a reality check. They need to think long and hard about what is best for their well-being in the long run. 

(HK Edition 11/05/2014 page7)

