 
The Alliance for True Democracy (ATD) on Wednesday unveiled its own plan for the 2017 Chief Executive (CE) Election by universal suffrage. This is also known as the "triple-track" format. 
The "triple-track" format put forward by the ATD features "civil nomination", which requires each CE election hopeful to get endorsement from at least 1 percent of all registered voters. The NC must confirm his or her nomination as CE election candidate; then there is "party nomination" which allows all political parties which won at least 5 percent of all legitimate votes in the latest Legislative Council election to nominate one candidate each or jointly; the NC must then confirm the candidacy of each person selected; and finally direct nomination by individual members of the NC. ATD Convener Cheng Yu-shek maintains that this format represents some compromise because the ATD "accepts a NC formed more or less the same way as the existing CE Election Committee is". 
The main difference between the published plan and various demands raised by opposition groups are that the former does not insist on "civil nomination" being part of the process. It maintains, instead, that CE election candidates can be decided through "civil nomination" and "party nomination" as well as by a Nominating Committee (NC). 
This change shows that the ATD knows no alternative plan can bypass the requirement of selection by a nominating committee. Given that the conducting of the CE election must be according to law, "civil nomination" is destined to eventually fizzle out. 
However, by NC, the ATD plan does not mean institutional nomination as the Basic Law stipulates, but rather directly by individual members of the NC. This means the ATD plan is still designed to trivialize or weaken the function of the NC. The ATD plan maintains that the NC cannot refuse to endorse nominees on grounds such as they are unpatriotic or oppose the central government. It is apparently another attempt to ensure that representatives of the opposition will join the CE election. 



The Basic Law makes it clear that the power to nominate CE election candidates rests with the NC only. This means no plan designed to trump the NC can deceive Hong Kong residents or be accepted by the central authorities - no matter how it is dressed up. The only way to implement universal suffrage in Hong Kong is to follow the law and build a consensus. 
Emily Lau, chairwoman of the Democratic Party, noted on Wednesday that her party would consider supporting any CE election plan as long as it allows dissidents to join the race - with or without "civil nomination". She added that the "triple-track" format does not require all three forms of nomination or tie one to another. That is exactly where it is different from "civil nomination" demanded by radical opposition groups. 
This "change of heart" suggests the opposition camp clearly understands no constitutional reform plan can circumvent the requirement for a NC or the statutory framework established in the Basic Law and decisions by the National People's Congress Standing Committee. Sticking to "civil nomination" no matter what means killing the lawful reform plan before it is born. Meanwhile, mainstream public opinion clearly favors implementation of universal suffrage in the 2017 CE Election as well as the matter being handled according to law and through rational discussion. That explains why the New Year's Day mass rally organized by the ATD demanding "real universal suffrage" was merely a shadow of previous protest marches. 
Even so, it should be noted that the "triple-track" format is far from being genuinely in deference to constitutional rules and the devil is in the details. Article 45 of the Basic Law stipulates only that the NC has the right to select CE election candidates through democratic procedures. This means there is only one track for the nomination process and any format other than it is illegal - be it "civil nomination" or "party nomination". 
The author is a veteran in current affairs commentary. This is an excerpted translation of his column published in Wen Wei Po on Jan 9. 

(HK Edition 01/10/2014 page9)

