 



Hopefully the central and Hong Kong SAR government's latest statements have given radical members of the opposition camp a dose of badly needed realism. This will help them cool down from what seems to be irrational exuberance. 
Radical dissidents believe that by orchestrating a "civil referendum" and threatening to paralyze Hong Kong's central business district they can coerce the central and HKSAR governments into accepting an election mechanism of their own design - even if it contravenes the law. 
In remarks specifically aimed at the "civil referendum" that finished on Sunday, the central and HKSAR governments again made it clear that no methods used in the 2017 Chief Executive election can deviate from the Basic Law and related decisions of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC). 
Dissidents should now accept reality: Their coercive strategies do not work with the central government. 
Most people will recall that there has never been a case when Beijing submitted to coercion and compromised on principles it holds dearly. It did not bow to Western powers when facing containment during the cold war. It did not cave in to pressure when negotiating the return of Hong Kong with Britain. 
Members of the opposition camp must also realize that any activity violating the Basic Law and related decisions of the NPCSC can only derail political reform in the city. 
Recent incidents in many foreign countries have shown that radicalism won't help advance democracy. Instead, they compromise the rule of law, destabilize society and reap havoc for the economy. 
Radicalism has never been the norm in Hong Kong. It should not be this time either. 
Having freely expressed their views on the mechanism for the 2017 Chief Executive election in the unofficial poll, it is time for the radicals, as well as other citizens, to accept reason. 
Only when reason prevails in the discourse on political reform, can Hong Kong people be optimistic about achieving universal suffrage. 

(HK Edition 07/01/2014 page9)

