



The world's leading credit rating agencies have invariably given favorable assessments of Hong Kong's financial health in recent quarterly reports. Most Hong Kong people breathed a collective sigh of relief amid worries over the long-term negative impact of "Occupy Central" on Hong Kong's economy and especially its financial sector, which was the original target of the illegal movement, at least on paper. 
Many still remember leading "Occupy" initiator Benny Tai Yiu-ting's fiendish promotion of his perverted version of "civil disobedience" all over the city with such ominous terms as "weapons of mass destruction", or "WMD" - a clear reference to war and doom if one knows what it represents. In Hong Kong's case today, however, it also stands for "weapons of mass democracy". It may ooze poor taste and irreverence for the spirit of democracy, the bad play on an existing abbreviation does denote the designers' dark psyche and malicious intent. 
Thankfully the masterminds of "Occupy" made the critical mistake of underestimating the political wisdom of Hong Kong people and have therefore failed to achieve their goals due to a lack of public support. Apparently they did not expect their brainchild to lose momentum so soon after the initial chaos it created. And they must have realized by now that "Occupy" will never win the popular backing necessary for them to pressure Beijing into some kind of compromise, if only to win some face before calling it quits. 
It shouldn't be too hard for people to notice the illegal campaign has been dragging on rather erratically in the past few weeks, as shown in the organizers' frequently changing demands and argumentative attitude. It is a sign of intellectual incompetence caused by inexperience and lack of sound advice. That, unfortunately, also means at some point in the near future the Hong Kong Federation of Students could make a "final thrust" of the sort often made by desperados. And that desperate strike could prove "lethal" in more ways than one, not least to Hong Kong's stability or the "occupiers" themselves. 
The fact that "Occupy" has so far failed to achieve its initial objective does not necessarily mean its masterminds will not try again. The reason is simple: The illegal movement was launched to distract the central government and obstruct the mainland's peaceful development. It is not about "true democracy" for Hong Kong in the first place and never will be, which is why the city's economy will always be the ideal hostage whenever the creators of "color revolutions" want to hold China to political ransom. This is also reason enough for the Hong Kong public to do their best to prevent the "occupiers" from stepping over the edge for their benefactors' sake. 
Hong Kong residents take great pride in making the city an economic miracle thriving on the promises of the enterprising spirit, rule of law and stability. It is ultimately up to ourselves to keep the success story that is Hong Kong alive and well as long as we can. 

(HK Edition 11/11/2014 page10)

