


      A commentary on "Occupy Central" and related issues published in Chinese on chinanews.com on July 22 caught my attention recently. Penned by Thomas T.L. Chan, the first ethnic Chinese to be elected Mayor of the London Borough of Redbridge in 2009.
      
        Through online research I discovered Chan was raised in Hong Kong before emigrating to Britain. He has been a British citizen for over three decades and served as a city councilor for many years before his election as Mayor of Redbridge - a position he held from 2009-10.
        
          The opinions he expresses in the article may surprise, even infuriate some "Occupy" supporters. This is because he effectively destroys the illegal movement's arguments. I applaud his astute observations.
          
            Chan explained that those clamoring for self-determination in Hong Kong's constitutional affairs have probably forgotten that the SAR has been under Chinese sovereignty for 17 years.
            
              The National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) has a constitutional role to play in deciding how Hong Kong's constitutional development should proceed. It is clear he wrote the article in response to the chorus of verbal attacks on the white paper addressing the practice of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy in the Hong Kong SAR issued by the State Council's Information Office in June.
              
                Chan makes no direct reference to the white paper itself, but his commentary leaves me in no doubt that he fully appreciates the central government's standpoint on its sovereign rule over Hong Kong. I completely agree with his view that many Hongkongers' misguided allegiance to "Occupy" leaders' unconstitutional demands for "public nomination", stems from ignorance.
                
                  He also reminds readers that the return of Hong Kong to China was agreed upon by the governments of the People's Republic of China and the United Kingdom in the joint declaration signed in 1984. This meant the UK government had no role to play in Hong Kong affairs after June 30, 1997 - including with respect to future constitutional reform.
                  
                    Chan mentions Chris Patten, the last colonial governor of Hong Kong, by name. He suspects Patten is among those who have forgotten the contents of the joint declaration. Over the years, Patten has been preaching about "Britain's responsibility" in seeing Hong Kong's democratic reforms through (following the handover).
                    
                      But I think Patten simply cannot resist the publicity he gets from reminding people he introduced some democratic reforms to the territory in the early 1990s. However, he never revealed that this was actually in violation of the joint declaration.
                      
                        Chan makes a strong argument in support of the China's sovereignty over Hong Kong - as explained in the white paper. He reminds readers of the fact that all Hong Kong governors were appointed by the British Crown. They had to swear allegiance to the Queen and British Constitution upon taking office. None went through a system of "public nomination", neither did "one person, one vote" elect them.
                        
                          The UK ruled Hong Kong for more than a century without democracy and the US government never had any problem with this, Chan says. In explaining this, he also exposes the hypocrisy of those advocating "international supervision" of Hong Kong.
                          
                            After making the case for China's right to jurisdiction over Hong Kong, Chan proceeds to explain what "One Country, Two Systems" means to the world as well as to Hong Kong. He emphasizes that the "One Country, Two Systems" policy is a crucial part of the Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law. He reminds us that, after signing and ratifying the joint declaration, the UK government also has to prove its integrity. This includes exercising the utmost restraint over Hong Kong's constitutional development. He further elaborates on the philosophy of "One Country, Two Systems" by refuting the dubious claims that certain "international standards" exist regarding "public nomination". "Please answer me," he demands in the commentary, "is there another 'One Country, Two Systems' political system in the world beside those for Hong Kong and Macao?"
                            
                              This is an important point: How anyone can even suggest internationalizing something that falls entirely under China's sovereign power, is beyond me.
                              
                                Chan also notes that there is an unwritten prerequisite that all heads of government around the world are expected to meet after being sworn in. They have to pledge allegiance to the constitution as well as to the nation. That is what patriots are required to do during Hong Kong's Chief Executive elections. But some opposition camp politicians would never admit this is a common "rule" in other countries. They have a right to express their opinions regarding patriotism as a key requirement for public office holders. But they have no right to demand public acceptance of leaders who are unpatriotic. Chan skillfully exposes these people and their arguments as absurd.
                                
                                  The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                                  
(HK Edition 11/03/2014 page9)

