


      After the National People's Congress Standing Committee's (NPCSC) ruling on arrangements for the election by universal suffrage of the Chief Executive of Hong Kong in 2017 was announced, some media pundits and academics condemned it. They said it was actually worse than they had expected. Many argue that the gates to universal suffrage have now been firmly shut. But I strongly disagree. I would argue that the NPCSC's ruling, in fact, "opens the gates for universal suffrage". It marks a starting point rather than an end. Here are reasons why:
      
        A decisive ruling by Beijing regarding the governing of Hong Kong was needed. This is to prevent the political arguments in Hong Kong over electoral reform becoming more heated. The country's top legislature had no choice but to issue its resolution. It will help avoid further misinterpretation of the Basic Law. It will also end the seemingly interminable arguments in Hong Kong over how best to attain universal suffrage. The resolution will enable Hong Kong to chart a clear course through future choppy waters.
        
          After the NPCSC's resolution on the election of CE candidates by universal suffrage, it is clear to the public that the central government is the best political gatekeeper for Hong Kong. The central government has also been the main driving force for introducing universal suffrage. We should not forget that during Hong Kong's 150 years of colonial history citizens were never allowed to vote for their leader. But Beijing has made "one man, one vote" possible in the city - only 17 years after the handover. Showing political courage and wisdom, the central government has fulfilled its commitments by advancing the democratic development of Hong Kong.
          
            Despite this, some troublemakers have tried hard to delay the democratic progress. Their unruly, confrontational tactics are unwise because Hong Kong people greatly cherish social stability. Their tactics have now proven to be counterproductive.
            
              The decision by the NPCSC came as a shock to the opposition camp - especially the group of radicals who still dream about unrealistic political reform proposals and who still advocate vague "international standards". The NPCSC's firm ruling will have a sobering effect on people. In this regard it will actually help avoid further resentment and antagonism in Hong Kong society.
              
                The "Occupy Central" campaign has already failed. Indeed, as early as an interview with Bloomberg news agency on Tuesday, Occupy Central co-founder Benny Tai admitted that the "civil disobedience" campaign, which they "planned to use to create tension", had been a failure "up to this point". Tai also acknowledged that public support for its planned mass sit-in was waning "because of the pragmatic thinking of Hong Kong people".
                
                  It is important for the "pan-democrats" to realize that intimidation won't change the political reality. It will never force Beijing to change its position.
                  
                    Moreover, the door to constructive dialogue is always open, for everyone. Democracy is definitely not a zero-sum game. It uses majority rule to help create a win-win situation in which all sectors of society can benefit. After all, unity is a powerful force during times of democratic transition. What unites us is far greater than what divides us.
                    
                      It is time for pragmatism, for all sectors across the political spectrum to re-focus on more meaningful discussion in the second round of consultation. Then we can progress through the five-step procedure for the implementation of universal suffrage. It is also time for those who are unhappy with the NPCSC's resolution to think seriously about the following questions:
                      
                        Are mass protests the only answer?
                        
                          What will these protesters do after their passion and anger has subsided?
                          
                            Is a veto by legislators really the only way?
                            
                              And without universal suffrage, will Hong Kong enter an era of endless political bickering?
                              
                                Hong Kong is poised to usher in a major new era. With the NPCSC opening up the gates, 5 million voters will now have a chance to cast their ballots. As former chief executive Tong Chee-hwa wisely noted, this will lead Hong Kong to a "real and substantial democracy". But we can't afford to falter now in our march toward democracy.
                                
                                  The author is a senior editor with China Daily Hong Kong Edition. boblee@chinadailyhk.com
                                  
(HK Edition 09/08/2014 page7)

