


      President Xi Jinping's keynote speech at the College of Europe, whose students are commonly described as "Europe's leaders-in-waiting" , has aroused heated debate among the global media, such as Xinhua News Agency, NYT, BBC, WSJ, FT, and many Hong Kong newspapers.
      
        No doubt Xi's remarks will help many Westerners and Hongkongers understand the "awakening lion" not just on the surface but at the core. China decided on socialism with Chinese characteristics as the most practical option. This was not a random decision, but a thoughtful choice after experimenting with other forms of governance, including constitutional monarchy, imperial restoration and a multi-party parliamentary system.
        
          China's late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping was perhaps the first to define China's unique development path. On July 18, 1981, he told Louis Cha, renowned writer and former publisher of Hong Kong-based Ming Pao newspaper, "I think there are more than 100 kinds of socialism in the world; there is no restriction. China will build socialism with Chinese characteristics." Deng's remark was extensively covered by media from Hong Kong, Macao and the West.
          
            For years, many pundits called China's unique socialist system "one party rule". This is inaccurate, because instead of a multi-party system, China has chosen "multi-party cooperation system" under which the Communist Party of China (CPC) takes the leading role. I'm not arguing the arrangement is a perfect formula for governance. But think about this - if the current workable system was swept away, the direction China would then follow would be a very big question. Perhaps it would be too big for it and the rest of the word to handle.
            
              Everyone familiar with China's history knows it has had a long, tortured past, suffering foreign invasions and with millions of lives being sacrificed. When the revolution led by Sun Yat-sen overthrew an autocratic monarchy that had ruled for centuries, a democratic Republic of China was established in 1911. Nationwide "genuine universal suffrage" took place in 1913. Qualified voters were men over the age of 21 who were educated or owned property. They voted for people who then picked delegates for the two-house National Assembly. But the whole system soon crumbled after its president, Yuan Shikai, declared himself emperor in 1915.
              
                The arduous and frustrating search for a path suitable for China has rarely been matched anywhere else in the world. And even after China adopted socialism, the ruling CPC made mistakes, and suffered serious setbacks. But fortunately, the CPC re-invigorated itself by blazing a trail of development since the late 1970s. China's destiny is now back in its own hands.
                
                  Addressing Europe's elite students, Xi cited an allusion taken from Yanzi's Spring and Autumn Annals - the tangerines grown south of the Huaihe River are sweet, but once transplanted north of the river, they taste bitter and sour - even though the fruit looks similar. Why is this? It's because the water and soil are not the same. This centuries-old Chinese wisdom tells us that political systems, like agricultural products, might differ from country to country due to the diversity of social, historical and cultural factors.
                  
                    It is no coincidence then when speaking at Russia's cradle of diplomats - the Moscow State Institute of International Relations - a year ago, Xi cited another Chinese metaphor: "You know if the shoe fits only if you put it on yourself". In other words - whether a certain model of development works for a country will ultimately depend on what its people will say about it.
                    
                      Harvard scholar Samuel Huntington, in his landmark book The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order, argued that post-Cold War conflicts would most frequently and violently occur because of cultural rather than ideological differences. These were most likely to occur between the world's major civilizations such as Western, Islamic, Sinic, Orthodox, etc. If policy makers in the West had understood cultural rifts, they could have avoided considerable bloodshed in Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan and Egypt, and most recently in the Crimea. Therefore, the West needs to do some soul-searching and stop trying to impose its ideals of democratic universalism and ideological interventionism.
                      
                        The benefits of Western-style democracy are not as they are often thought to be. In fact, the flaws and drawbacks are all too obvious. They have been frequently shown in many democratic countries in Asia, including Japan, the Philippines and Thailand. Even Hong Kong - the quasi-democratic jurisdiction which is on its way to universal suffrage, is now suffering economically because of endless political bickering.
                        
                          The West has been harping on about freedom, democracy and human rights for some 200 years. But don't forget, cultural diversity is promoted by the UN as integral to human rights. These differences should be respected. In China's case, the West needs to bear in mind both China's past and present and draw references from her accomplishments and the Chinese way of thinking.
                          
                            China could triumph again, but only if it adheres to a development path in line with reality. It is not an exaggeration to say that the country's experiences - drawing on revolutions and political experiments - have been hard-earned at the cost of blood, sweat and tears. China, therefore, will not cast them aside lightly. Any attempt to transplant an alien political system on Chinese soil could have catastrophic consequences.
                            
                              The author is a senior editor with China Daily Hong Kong Edition. boblee@chinadailyhk.com
                              
(HK Edition 04/11/2014 page9)

