
After exactly three hours of debate in the chamber of the House of Commons, the emergency debate entitled "Foreign Affairs Committee (Hong Kong Visit)" was granted by the speaker. 
It came to a resolution which stated that "the house has considered the ban by China on the Foreign Affairs Committee (FAC) visit to Hong Kong" - no more no less. 
We now know that the granting of an emergency debate is a rare occurrence in the British parliament and some members referred to this as "unusual, if not unprecedented". 
I would suggest, however, that the whole affair was no more than a face-saving exercise for British politicians. The saga demonstrated their "frustration and disappointment" at their proposed visit to Hong Kong being forbidden by China. They used the debate to assert they had every right to visit and inquire into Hong Kong's current situation, as Britain had jointly signed the Sino-British Joint Declaration. 
The debate was attended by no more than 30 MPs, a third of them members of the FCA. This is not unusual as apart from prime minister's questions the parliamentiary chamber is often empty. Members claim that parliament is the "mother of democracy" as well as a symbol of freedom and human rights but the dismal turnout of less than 5 percent of democratically elected representatives made a mockery of the exercise. It also speaks volumes about the urgency and interest accorded to the debate by the majority of MPs. 
During the debate, members repeatedly referred to the joint declaration signed between China and Britain in 1984. This outlined that Hong Kong would return to the sovereignty of China under the "One Country, Two Systems" policy. In his opening statement, the chairman of the FAC declared that members were keen to see Britain exercise her obligation to uphold the policy for Hong Kong residents, thus ensuring that the "capitalist system, rights, freedoms and way of life" remain unchanged. He also maintained that "the ban is a mistake and an attack on the men and women of the free world". 
I am glad to report that three hours later the same chairman was able to conclude that the "joint declaration is still alive and well". Furthermore, despite the fact that the ban might affect "bilateral relations" between the two nations, they could be rebuilt and the FAC "remains willing to visit Hong Kong". Why ask for an emergency debate when he already knew all this? 
The attacks on China's decision to ban the visit, I strongly believe, were generally based on members' selective interpretations of the joint declaration and the Basic Law. I say this with great certainty based on members' comments during the debate. 
From the very beginning, the FAC chairman mentioned the evidence of "two key pro-democracy campaigners" who appeared before the committee this July. 
These two "campaigners", unfortunately, are individuals who refuse to accept the reality of Hong Kong's return to China and would travel the world to assert that Beijing would "screen out candidates" for the election of the Chief Executive (CE) - the same term used by the chairman in his speech, demonstrating his reliance on the information provided by these two individuals who no longer have any role to play in the current pro-democracy movement. 
Secondly, quite a number of members claimed that under the "One Country, Two Systems" policy, the Hong Kong government, and not the central government, should determine whether or not the proposed FAC visit would interfere with China's internal affairs. In this interpretation they were wrong for it was clearly stated in the joint declaration, under Article 13, that the "HKSAR will be directly under the authority of the Central People's Government of the PRC and will enjoy a high degree of autonomy, except in foreign and defence affairs". 
China, therefore, has every right as the sovereign power administering Hong Kong, to make decisions regarding another sovereign state - in this case, Britain. 
Thirdly, British parliamentarians understood the importance of Article 45 of the Basic Law in relation to the election (now nomination) of the CE. Nevertheless they failed to mention that in the same Article 45 it mentions the "principle of gradual and orderly progress". That is why they insisted on the need for Hong Kong to make "significant, major steps toward representative democracy". The demand for so-called true universal suffrage by the two student groups and the "Occupy Central" movement by overturning legally binding decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) can hardly be regarded as "orderly progress". 
The summing up of the foreign and commonwealth minister, in my opinion, gave the only well-reasoned response to the debate. He stated and I quote, "the UK has consistently called on all parties to engage in dialogue within the parameters of the August decision by the NPCSC". 
Let's hope all those engaged in the pan-democratic movement will come to their senses and act accordingly to resume dialogue and engage in the consultation for constitutional changes. As for the British parliamentarians, they might have to satisfy themselves with reports from their embassy and other sources of intelligence at the moment until such time that the door opens for them to pay a visit again. 
The author is director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years. 




(HK Edition 12/05/2014 page10)

