



It should have become clear to opposition legislators and their supporters that their game of brinkmanship is over. Their bluff has been called, and any further theatrics they plan to stage in protest at the resolution of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) on Hong Kong electoral reform will be pointless. 
From a sense of duty and for the sake of honor, they should behave like adults. They should sit down with the government to calmly, rationally work out a reform proposal acceptable to the majority of Hong Kong people. As Li Fei, NPCSC's deputy secretary-general, said in Hong Kong, many opposition leaders are patriots who love Hong Kong. It's time for them to show their love for the city by actively participating, in good faith, to make universal suffrage a reality in Hong Kong for the first time. 
Of course, there will be diehard radicals, including the spoilt-brats of academia, political goons, misguided students and social misfits. These people are compelled to continue to fret and strut on the streets, waving their fists and shouting meaningless slogans, simply to indulge themselves in public. Recognizing the futility of their efforts, leaders of this group of radicals have tried to justify the illegal activities they plan - mainly "Occupy Central" - by saying they are necessary. They claim they are just trying to warn Hong Kong people not to accept "fake democracy". 
But opposition leaders - especially elected legislative councilors - must dissociate themselves from these radicals. They must denounce any illegal activity that could cause hardship to people, tarnishes Hong Kong's image and hurts its economy. They may find the framework of electoral reform prescribed by the NPCSC too restrictive. But they have already had plenty of opportunities to express their dissatisfaction. 
However, turning their backs on electoral reform simply because they didn't get all of what they wanted from the NPCSC framework is tantamount to gross irresponsibility as honorable members of the legislature. Hong Kong people don't expect elected officials of any political persuasion to reject universal suffrage. They expect them to make genuine efforts, with open minds, to help formulate a proposal acceptable to all. 
Top SAR government officials have reiterated time and again that there is room for maneuver within the NPCSC framework. The significance of each and every outstanding issue that still needs to be addressed in the drafting of the final proposal is examined and analyzed in a front page story in today's China Daily Hong Kong Edition. 
Together, these outstanding issues can affect the degree of public participation in the electoral process from nomination to the final outcome. Some of these issues are highly technical in nature. Resolving them requires much patience and clear thinking - common attributes of seasoned politicians. 
Let the spoilt brats and their playmates throw a collective tantrum in the streets. The police can deal with them. 
There are much more worthy tasks awaiting those politicians who profess to love Hong Kong in the halls of the Legislative Council. 

(HK Edition 09/04/2014 page1)

