
Three seminars, held by the General Office of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC) on matters concerning Hong Kong's constitutional reforms, concluded in Shenzhen on Friday. Li Fei, deputy general-secretary of the NPCSC and chairman of the HKSAR Basic Law Committee, promised those present that he would relay their opinions to the NPCSC. He also reiterated the central government's views on key issues. This included maintaining social stability in Hong Kong and implementing universal suffrage in accordance with the Basic Law. 
We all know stability is essential in any society. All political reforms ultimately aim at achieving social stability. Citizens can then focus on economic development to improve their living standards without worrying about political debate. Unfortunately the opposition camp has decided to ignore the public's desire for constitutional development. They have threatened to harm people's hopes for universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive (CE) election if plans for constitutional reform don't meet "international standards". 
Many experts have reminded the "pan-democrats" that there are no universally binding standards for democratic elections. Moreover, the opposition camp and its overseas supporters have yet to specify exactly what they mean by "international standards". Some have alluded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The covenant is regarded as the most widely accepted set of principles concerning such issues. However, they have not explained why so many signatories of the covenant have adopted different electoral systems. They also need to explain why Hong Kong can't have an electoral system best suited to its own conditions like other democratic societies. 
On Friday, Li discussed several issues of public concern. This included why the Basic Law requires the nomination of CE election candidates by a Nominating Committee (NC) in accordance with democratic procedures. He said this requirement of the Basic Law was in the best interests of Hong Kong. Li said all the measures which the central government had adopted in the past 17 years were to preserve Hong Kong's prosperity and stability. 



Some of the critical decisions Beijing has made since the handover were in response to the confusion created by the opposition camp. The current debate over the methods for selecting the CE by universal suffrage in 2017 and forming the Legislative Council in 2016 is another episode in the long contest between China and some Western powers. It has been going on since China and Britain began negotiating the return of sovereign rule in Hong Kong to China. 
The opposition camp wants people to believe its demand for "true democracy" or "genuine universal suffrage" is more important than other concerns in Hong Kong. But it has failed to convince the public that these can be achieved by violating the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC. 
The "pan-democrats" got things badly wrong when they decided to blackmail the central government with "Occupy Central". The majority of Hong Kong residents have made clear their opposition to this illegal campaign through opinion polls and the massive rally on Aug 17. The rally attracted more than 190,000 participants. A public petition, signed by 1.5 million Hong Kong residents, also clearly demonstrated people's support for the anti-"Occupy" movement. 
The majority of Hong Kong residents are convinced radical members of the opposition camp have other motives. These radicals are attempting to sacrifice the public interest to promote their own cynical political agenda. The public are also deeply concerned that "Occupy" will jeopardize the rule of law in Hong Kong. "Occupy" advocates argue that to violate existing law in the name of "civil disobedience" is justifiable. Many believe these persistent demands for "public nomination" have more to do with satisfying certain politicians' ambitions than serving the public interest. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 08/23/2014 page5)

