


      Martin Lee, founding chairman of the Democratic Party of Hong Kong, wrote an article in the New York Times (NYT) under the headline "Hong Kong's Shaky Democratic Future". It was accorded considerable prominence by the US newspaper as the lead commentary on its opinion pages. That was quite flattering to Lee - given the NYT's reputation as "a weathervane of Western mainstream views".
      
        The article wasted no time saying: "For the nearly 17 years since Hong Kong's handover from Britain to China in 1997, we Hongkongers have been dreaming of the genuine democracy that was promised by Beijing. But today our autonomy and the rule of law it buttresses are under threat from the mainland central government."
        
          If the first sentence of the paragraph is more or less true, the second one is quite the opposite. What is the rule of law? Simply put, it means governing in accordance with the law. Going a little further into this, one realizes this faith is omnipresent in all aspects of constitutional development. In other words, it embodies such ideas as respect for the constitution, judicial independence, statutory limitations of government and protecting human rights. On all these principles, Lee's article presents no proof whatsoever of any of these being missing in Hong Kong today.
          
            Through years of observation I am absolutely confident the spirit of the rule of law remains cherished and revered by Hong Kong society. It has not even diminished a tiny bit since the handover in 1997. It still stands tall today - just like the statue of Themis - the blindfolded Goddess of Justice in front of the old Legislative Council Building.
            
              The article goes on to say "even more pernicious is an ongoing campaign by the mainland leadership and its local allies to deny Hongkongers the right to a democratic future, a right that was guaranteed to us in the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration and in our mini-constitution, the Basic Law, which was promulgated in 1990." To a Western reader, not familiar with Hong Kong, this accusation by Lee could not be more shocking, but it is nowhere near the truth. To back up this disturbing scenario, Lee, a prominent legal counsel, says that: "Since 1997, we have plodded along with a quasi-democratic political system." Here, he is actually complaining about the requirements by the central government that nominees for the 2017 Chief Executive Election by universal suffrage "must love Hong Kong as well as the nation" even though such a requirement would be considered a matter of course in any country facing similar circumstances. It is true Beijing promised Hong Kong universal suffrage in 2017 when the SAR celebrates its 20th anniversary. But to describe this as "moving the goal posts"? This is both sad and amusing at the same time.
              
                In the US and UK no politician would have the nerve to declare they do not love their country or are not a patriot. This would automatically end their political careers. Patriotism is not only a fundamental requirement for politicians, but also a sentimental one for citizens. All immigrants must pledge allegiance to the US and its constitution as well as renouncing allegiance to their countries of origin before receiving American citizenship.
                
                  Lee's next accusation is "Beijing loyalists are seeking to control the 2017 election through the nomination process." The "proof" he offers is that Zhang Dejiang, the top central government official in charge of Hong Kong and Macao affairs, told a press conference during the annual sessions of the National People's Congress that Beijing had to "screen" all CE election candidates by means of a Nomination Committee. Lee has been crying foul ever since, warning that such an electoral system would destroy the Hong Kong government's legitimacy and transparency.
                  
                    As a senior counsel, Lee knows the Basic Law better than the average person. Article 45 of the Basic Law stipulates in unmistakable terms "The ultimate aim is selection of the Chief Executive by universal suffrage upon nomination by a broadly representative Nominating Committee in accordance with democratic procedures." Now, as Chief Secretary Carrie Lam has noted recently, how the Nominating Committee will be formed to make it as broadly representative can be "discussed" with all the parties concerned. But there is no doubt the Basic Law authorizes only "one track" for the nomination process - the Nominating Committee - instead of the "triple-track format" proposed by the opposition camp which also includes nomination by individual voters and political parties. The Basic Law is the constitutional code that anchors the implementation of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle. Respecting the Basic Law is the same as respecting the rule of law.
                    
                      As well as accusing the central government without concrete proof of "interfering in" and "endangering" Hong Kong's democratic development, Lee also makes some unsubstantiated claims, such as Hong Kong's autonomy and freedom of the press "are being eroded". It is a shame he failed to back such accusations with facts. For example, he says in the article, "The current Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying is prone to consult with Beijing in advance of making decisions." Lee needs to remember that the Chief Executive is accountable to the central government. It is his duty to "consult" the central government whenever necessary. One cannot wonder why Lee and his supporters never found anything wrong when the governor of Hong Kong made the same kind of duty calls to London during the colonial era.
                      
                        Another issue which Lee says concerns him is, "in 2012 the government attempted to usher in 'patriotic education' and a manual for all primary school students describing the Chinese Communist Party as 'progressive, selfless and united'." This reminds me of a personal experience shared by a Chinese diplomat in the US. His daughter attended a local elementary school near the Chinese Consulate where he worked. After three years, she became so accustomed to a daily school ritual that every time she heard the US national anthem she stood up and sang with her hand placed on her chest. This is how effective American-style patriotic education is. Schools throughout the US begin every day with teachers leading their students in singing the national anthem. All classrooms and hallways are decorated with portraits of the country's presidents and other significant personalities. It is regrettable some opposition politicians in Hong Kong cannot accept that the city is back under China's sovereign rule. This is why they make absurd comments about things they find objectionable but which most people just take for granted.
                        
                          Towards the end of his rant, Lee writes: "The most unnerving recent examples of Beijing's interference concern the freedom of our press. In January, the respected editor of Ming Pao, an independent newspaper, was replaced by a Beijing-friendly boss." And "most independent analysts, and many of the paper's journalists, believe that the central government pressured the newspaper's owners to make this move. In a mysterious and disturbing twist, the former editor, Kevin Lau Chun-to, was stabbed in a vicious attack last month on the street in broad daylight." It is public knowledge that Ming Pao management has denied many times that replacing its editor-in-chief was politically motivated. And Hong Kong police have arrested a number of people suspected of involvement in the attack on Lau. Police have told the public repeatedly that they have not found any evidence linking the crime to Lau's job.
                          
                            These are only some of the examples Lee listed in his "petition", but they are hearsay, assumptions and far-fetched claims. Lee has been irresponsible making such accusations without convincing evidence. His comments are a striking example of the damage that can be made to the rule of law through blatant political bias.
                            
                              The author is a current affairs commentator.
                              
(HK Edition 03/21/2014 page7)

