 
Someone told me that "democracy is always a good thing." I doubt that, for there is no system in the world, with man's limited experience, which is absolutely good, including democracy. If democracy or the creation of democracy is really so good, there would be no problems in countries with democratic governments. And in Hong Kong, if the democratically formed Legislative Council (LegCo) is examined closely, we find this is the case also. 
For example, Hong Kong's taxpayers had to endure two filibusters in 2012, one over government restructuring, and another over LegCo's by-election amendment. There were another two filibusters in 2013: one for living allowances for the elderly and another for Hong Kong's annual budget. In regard to these four filibusters, irrespective of whether the obstruction failed or succeeded, the loser was Hong Kong's people, because of the money and time wasted without achieving any constructive results. 
Along with outrageous filibusters, the LegCo has also experienced no-confidence votes. This is not in accordance with the spirit of Hong Kong's political system as outlined in the Basic Law. The practice of no-confidence votes often occurs for little reason. Since the beginning of the government's new term in July 2012, a few lawmakers brought five motions of no-confidence against the Chief Executive (CE) and his principal officials within 18 months. One of these was for the CE himself, two were for the education secretary, and another two for the development secretary. All legally non-binding motions were vetoed, with more time and money wasted. 
For three days this month, Hong Kong people witnessed an abortive meeting of the housing sub-committee (with a quorum of eight) in the LegCo on Jan 21, and an unjustified motion on the so-called "safeguarding editorial independence and autonomy" on Jan 23. 



There were 25 members in that sub-committee concerned about housing problems facing Hong Kong people. So the secretary for housing and transport was invited to give a briefing on relevant measures as stated in the Policy Address. Despite the fact the secretary of the sub-committee knew in advance that nine members would take leave, and expected 16 members would attend, only four turned up! Those who were absent had various excuses such as sickness, traffic jams, other appointments, or they did not give a reason. With their name prefixed with "the honorable", these lawmakers had no better arguments than ordinary workers or staff in private companies. Some of their excuses were even worse than those given by ordinary people. Abortive meetings due to insufficient forums are yet another way time and money is wasted. 
As for the motion on "self-censorship", the opposition lawmakers were influenced by the alleged withdrawal of an advertisement from am730 by the ICBC Bank, the stopping of an advertisement by the Standard Chartered Bank for Apple Daily, and the removal of the chief editor of Ming Pao by its boss. The motion, deliberately trying to accuse the central government of undue interference, was based on groundless rumors and speculation. It tried to incite disaffection with the "One Country, Two Systems" principle on the unfounded claim that press freedom had deteriorated in Hong Kong. 
Actually these two banks said the decisions about their advertisements were based on a marketing strategy and ad purely commercial motives. Again, this issue is another example of LegCo wasting time and money. Noting these examples, one may again conclude that democracy is not always good. 
I believe the principles of democracy are twofold: One is the ruling of the majority; and another is respect for the minority. But both principles should serve one purpose and one only - they should be for the people. Now, the minority may express their views at will, but they should not waste LegCo's time and taxpayers' money for their own advantage. 
The LegCo always asks the government to be accountable. By the same token, all lawmakers should also be accountable to LegCo and its sub-committees. The LegCo should also be accountable to the people. For this reason, a higher standard of accountability should be established for all members, including minority members of LegCo, rather than ordinary staff in private institutions. If they have put private matters before public affairs, or are absent from meetings without reasonable excuses, they should be penalized and lose a certain fraction of their salaries. 
In Chapter 77 of Tao Te Ching, Lao-tse said, "the Tao of heaven means to compensate the deficient by reducing the excess." If it is taboo to arrange a malicious filibuster, to have an offensive motion or to abort a LegCo meeting, then LegCo should take measures to stop this happening. 
The author is a HK veteran commentator and professor at the Research Center of Hong Kong and Macao Basic Law, Shenzhen University. 

(HK Edition 01/30/2014 page1)

