 
The Alliance for True Democracy (ATD), composed of 26 opposition members of the Legislative Council (LegCo), published its own plan for the Chief Executive (CE) election by universal suffrage in 2017. The plan introduces a "triple-track" format for the nomination process by proposing that CE election candidates should be decided through "civil nomination", "party nomination" and/or by a Nominating Committee. 
The "triple-track" format indicates the major opposition parties' unwillingness to be tied to the "civil nomination" battle cry of radical opposition groups. 
But it also reveals that the opposition parties are split over the notion that Civic Party chief Audrey Eu Yuet-mee is the only probable opposition candidate in the next CE election. By proposing that any political party or group which won at least 5 percent of all valid votes in the last LegCo election can nominate a CE election candidate on its own or jointly, the "triple-track" format shows that other major opposition parties are refusing to carry the Civic Party on their shoulders. This is a sign that the opposition camp is not completely in agreement with the British and US efforts to help Audrey Eu vie for the CE office and for the Civic Party to replace the Democratic Party and to dominate the opposition camp. 
The "triple-track" format reveals the opposition camp is splitting further apart. Cheng Yu-shek, ATD convener and a leading member of the Civic Party, said the "triple-track" format was a complete plan that "will not be ours without any of the components". Democratic Party Chairwoman Emily Lau, however, insists that "civil nomination" is "definitely not indispensable". She said her party would consider backing any plan that allows dissidents to run for CE with or without "civil nomination". Meanwhile, Leung Kwok-hung, head of the ultra-radical group the League of Social Democrats, said that the Democratic Party was in fundamental disagreement with the ATD over whether "civil nomination" was indispensable or not and needed to clarify the matter. Lau Ka-hung, a spokesman on constitutional affairs for the ultra-radical group People Power echoed Leung's view of the Democratic Party by accusing the latter of betraying the "pan-democratic camp". 



The opposition camp has advocated an assortment of plans with "civil nomination" as their rallying call. But the one advocated by Scholarism stands out as the most extreme. The ultra-radical student group calls for a Nominating Committee consisted of all 3.5 million or so qualified Hong Kong voters. Each CE election hopeful must be endorsed by at least 100,000 of them to be nominated. People Power wants the Nominating Committee to be composed of popularly elected district councilors and LegCo members, or anyone who wins the support of 1 percent of all registered voters in geographical constituencies (about 35,000 in all) or 5 percent of current LegCo members, or 5 percent of incumbent district councilors. The Democratic Party introduced three slightly different plans of its own on Oct 3, 2013. These were immediately belittled by People Power as too conservative. Apparently the "triple-track" format is a departure from the radical factions' efforts to put all opposition parties into a "civil nomination" basket. This shows it is no longer possible for anyone wishing to be accepted by the Hong Kong government or the central government to ignore the Basic Law in regard to the Nominating Committee. 
The author is director of the Hong Kong and Macao Development Strategy Research Center. This is an excerpted translation of his column published in Wen Wei Po on Jan 10. 

(HK Edition 01/13/2014 page9)

