 



Secretary for Security Lai Tung-kwok published a detailed article today (Thursday) explaining why "Occupy Central" is illegal and the possible consequences for those who participate in it. This is the first time the principal official in charge of security affairs for the SAR has issued such a reminder. It is directed at people intending to join the illegal campaign which could potentially paralyze Hong Kong's political and financial center. 
Many commentators have cited Hong Kong's existing laws as proof that "Occupy Central" will constitute an act of illegal assembly. Participants may be charged with this offense and, if found guilty, punished by three to five years of imprisonment. With a criminal record, a person will be barred from entering a professional career. Therefore, young people should think very carefully about whether it is worth the price while participating in the "Occupy" campaign. 
The security chief's comments add considerable weight to the warnings against participation. This shows that the law enforcement authorities are deadly serious about maintaining public order and protecting the safety of Hong Kong residents. 
The organizers of "Occupy Central" have long admitted that the illegal campaign aims to undermine the rule of law by deliberately violating the existing Public Security Ordinance. They have gone so far as to call it an act of "civil disobedience". But they have yet to convince people why they have the right to break the law, at society's expense, for something beneficial to only a few ill-motivated politicians. 
It is common knowledge that the rule of law is an integral part of democracy. There is no reason to doubt that the "occupiers" know this. This raises an important question: How can they justify an illegal act designed to weaken the rule of law in the name of democracy? What good can democracy do without the effective rule of law anyway? According to their logic they can do whatever they want in the name of "true democracy". This is another way of saying "the end justifies the means" and "to hell with rule of law." 
Maybe the "Occupy Central" advocates are trying to tell young people that if their illegal campaign succeeds, then the rule of law will be in tatters. They just might get away with the offences with which they will be charged. Is that what Hong Kong society wants in exchange for letting the "occupiers" have their way? Anyone considering joining the "occupiers" has to ask themselves whether they really want democracy without the rule of law. 

(HK Edition 06/12/2014 page9)

