
A chorus of defiant complaints in Hong Kong greeted the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) decision, on Aug 31, that the 2017 election of the Chief Executive (CE) should be done by universal suffrage. For people observing Hong Kong from overseas, this reaction will be hard to understand. During all the time the "Occupy Central" campaign was brewing, its spokesmen and behind-the-scenes sponsors stressed that all they wanted was universal suffrage for the 2017 CE election. Now that Beijing has heard their demands and granted their wishes, these same activists are loudly expressing their disappointment. Some even said they felt "cheated". All 27 "pan-democratic" lawmakers have vowed to veto any proposal based on the NPCSC framework in the Legislative Council (LegCo). 
It is only now, after the NPCSC's ruling, that we learn that it was not universal suffrage that the advocates of "civil disobedience" wanted. They wanted to do away with the Nominating Committee (NC). They want to field their own candidates for CE - presumably those not subject to Beijing's requirements that candidates must love both the country and Hong Kong. Conceivably, Beijing could have responded by saying, "Why didn't you say so, instead of just harping on about universal suffrage?" Presumably, the central government could have claimed it was the party that should feel disappointed, or even cheated. 
The answer can only be that if the activists did not use universal suffrage as their stated goal, they may not have garnered as much support as they did among some sections of the Hong Kong public - particularly idealistic university students. They knew they could not afford to alienate the public by espousing a no-candidate-screening system in which whoever wished to stand for election could do so (even someone who risked pushing higher democracy for its own sake at the expense of the stability of Hong Kong). 



Some "pan-democrats" are now demanding that Hong Kong's electoral system be brought more in line with "international standards". They have condemned the "candidate-screening" process of the NC. This is disingenuous. They should know there is no democracy anywhere where elections are conducted without some form of candidate screening. The intra-party primary, or caucus as is sometimes called, is the institution through which the screening function is performed in elections in overseas democracies ranging from the United States to India. Now, admittedly, in these primaries, a greater number of constituents participate than will in the 1,200-member NC for the HKSAR's election in 2017. This even takes into account the fact that the NC itself is voted in by 250,000 individual and corporate voters. So, a legitimate demand that Hong Kong's democracy activists could have raised with Beijing would have been either to make the NC more broadly representative, or to lower the threshold for selection by the NC of the two or three finalists who will stand for CE election. But, as neither did the democracy activists, it is pointless for them to now cry foul. 
We should all recognize that the implicit competition between Hong Kong's opposition camp and Beijing is not about who loves Hong Kong more, but rather, whose way of showing that love is more understandable to the greatest number of people. The answer returns to the original intention of the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration on the return of Hong Kong to China: Its stability and prosperity must be preserved, under "One Country, Two Systems" and the pledge of 50 years without change. Any move that jeopardizes the stability and prosperity of the SAR would be a betrayal of the people of Hong Kong. 
The author is a professor of Politics and International Law at New York University, and author/editor of 22 books, including Hong Kong the Super Paradox: Life after Return to China (2000). 

(HK Edition 09/15/2014 page9)

