 
In his latest piece entitled "From Beethoven to Beijing", published through Project Syndicate on July 14, Chris Patten, the last governor of Hong Kong, has taken political hypocrisy to new heights. Without even a hint of embarrassment the former governor is now preaching to his former subjects about the importance of freedom. 
He writes: "Much of the history of the two centuries since Beethoven composed his opera has centered on that quest for freedom: the fight against colonial powers, the campaigns for basic human rights, the resistance to modern totalitarian and authoritarian regimes." 
Despite the title of the piece, Patten's arguments really have nothing to do with Beethoven's only opera Fidelio, with which Patten drew parallels in his attack on China. The article is devoid of any real substance. When reprinting the piece, the South China Morning Post (SCMP) changed its title to "Freedom will triumph, in Hong Kong and elsewhere". By "elsewhere", the SCMP presumably meant the mainland. Why didn't it have the guts to say this? 
Reading Patten's piece, one wonders if he has gone back to the past in a time-machine and changed history; replacing China with the United Kingdom as a colonial power! 
I have checked - and time machines have yet to be invented. But history books reveal that in the century and a half before 1997, Britain never granted Hong Kong democracy. In fact, Britain ruled Hong Kong as a colony. Under colonial rule, people were not allowed the same level of political participation which they enjoy today, as citizens of a SAR of the People's Republic of China. 



History also recalls that Patten quickly left Hong Kong on Britain's Royal Yacht after China assumed sovereignty of the city on July 1 1997. This is because the Chinese government was determined to end a disgraceful episode in the country's history, which it did through peaceful negotiation. This stance on the part of the central government had the firm support of the Chinese people. It was always their desire that Hong Kong should return to China - ever since the days of the Opium Wars. 
Patten's verbosity is very British. He notes the contentious issue regarding "the extent to which concern for human rights should be a consideration in setting foreign policy". But he did not do this in a way that treated both sides of the debate fairly. For example, one sentence reads: "One cannot credibly thump the table about human rights in one country, but keep one's opinions to oneself in another - an all-too-common occurrence when, say, a trade deal might suffer." 
Patten is perhaps referring to the 14 billion pound (about $30 billion) trade deals that were signed amid Premier Li Keqiang's visit to the United Kingdom in June. 
Patten is not the first to attack the current British government for being overly deferential to China, but his piece serves a more specific purpose - to make his time as governor of Hong Kong look better by comparison. 
A couple of weeks ago, Anson Chan and Martin Lee toured the United Kingdom again to complain about a lack of support from Britain for the brand of democracy they both advocate for Hong Kong. Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg was the only representative from the coalition government willing to meet the pair. A source close to him was quoted as saying that Clegg was "dismayed that the Tories won't stand up for democracy in Hong Kong; something every government has done since 1997". 
Chris Patten's "From Beethoven to Beijing" is a response to Clegg's criticism. Not all Tories are realists, it seems. Patten, among others, is still regarded by some of his supporters in Hong Kong as principled, and "consistent". But many of us have a different view. We can still remember how the UK revised their nationality laws at the last minute to deprive Hong Kong citizens of the right of abode in the UK. This was pure hypocrisy. In this regard, countries like France treated their former colonial subjects better. Chris Patten oversaw the execution of this policy. Of all people, this man has the nerve to talk about human rights, freedom and moral integrity! 
Colonialism is often accompanied by a sense of moral superiority. The colonizers feel it is their duty to rule over the people they have colonized, so as to spread their views about religion, science, trade and other issues. In the post-colonial global order, people like Patten are still under the illusion that it is their responsibility to teach other countries how they should behave. But this time, these self-proclaimed crusaders are equipped with a new set of slogans. These are "human rights", "freedom" and "democracy". 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 07/22/2014 page9)

