



It seems that Hong Kong has evolved - from a city of protests to one of referendums. Firstly, let's get the facts straight. The international media is excited about what it sees as the beginning of the "Asian Spring". It has let factual reporting take a back seat. The referendum that was planned in the last couple of days, and suddenly aborted on Sunday afternoon, was not about "whether to stay in the streets or accept government offers for more talks and clear their protest camps," as media such as the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) reported. 
In fact, anyone who has an understanding of Chinese and stays abreast of local news will know the above statement is far from true. Worse, it is highly misleading. The Wall Street Journal was one of the few who got the basic facts right when it wrote: "Protest leaders were eager to stress (the referendum) won't be used to measure protesters' willingness to retreat, and instead is intended to gauge the opinions of the thousands who have occupied city streets. The leaders hope it will show wide support for their goals." 
"Occupy" leaders have stressed, in Chinese, again and again, that the referendum is not an "exit strategy". This means that no matter the outcome of the vote, the protesters will not be obliged to leave the streets. I am not sure where CBC and the like get the impression that the vote is about whether or not to continue the occupation. 
One explanation is that journalists from foreign media outlets are lazy. The other could be that they have a hidden agenda. The two possible motions are expounded on the "Occupy" movement's official website - www.oclp.hk, and it is obvious that the vote is nothing to do with "whether or not to accept government offers". 
Motion 1 reads: "In the report to be submitted by the HKSAR Government to the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the State Council, it must include a suggestion that the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress withdraws its Aug 31 decision." 
Motion 2 reads: "The multi-party platform for handling political reform controversies must affirm the abolition of functional constituencies in the 2016 Legislative Council election and must include public nomination as a nomination method in the 2017 Chief Executive election." 



If "Occupy" organizers want to decide whether or not to accept government offers, they simply need to ask "yes or no." 
It is unreasonable to insist that a report, as yet undrafted, or a platform, as yet undecided, should reach certain conclusions. 
These motions, if carried, are in fact asking student leaders not to accept any offer from the government but why make things so complicated? And if there is no majority support from the protesters, for either of these motions, should we conclude that they want the students to accept the government offer and leave the streets? I do not think so. 
On Aug 31, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC) adopted the decision on the selection of the Chief Executive in 2017 and on the method for forming the Legislative Council in 2016. 
The decision says, among other things, that the NPCSC was of the opinion that the report submitted by the Hong Kong government on political reform "reflects comprehensively and objectively the views collected during the public consultation; and is thus a positive, responsible and pragmatic report." In other words, the NPCSC thought the Hong Kong government's original report was sound, and made its decision based on that report. And now, the referendum's first motion wants our government to write a report telling the NPCSC: "Hey look, you thought my report was good, but in fact it was rubbish. I am giving you another report, and you should reach a different conclusion based on this one." 
The referendum's second motion is even more peculiar. It is asking multiple parties to form themselves into a "rubber stamp" platform, the sole purpose for the existence of which would be to declare the pre-determined conclusion that nomination methods in the 2017 Chief Executive election must include public nomination. By the way, this has already been ruled out by the Basic Law. 
What the referendum calls for is unreasonable and unconstitutonal. It is not even logical. Yet, the Western media see it as an exemplar of democracy. On second thoughts, perhaps it is indeed an exemplar of the Western media as well as its style of democracy. This is so utterly untenable and unpopular it had to be called off before it was completed. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 10/28/2014 page10)

