 



The latest shock to Hong Kong's constitutional development occurred on Friday when two of the most prominent opposition figures in Hong Kong got star-treatment in Washington DC. 
Former chief secretary and founder of Hong Kong 2020 Anson Chan and Democratic Party founding chairman Martin Lee met with US officials - including Vice-President Joe Biden - in the White House. This was for a display of pampering by Uncle Sam to lift the sinking hearts of Hong Kong's opposition. 
Like a ring master encouraging some lackluster clowns after a disappointing performance, Washington removed any doubts that it is meddling in Hong Kong affairs. This is in violation of the established norms of international relations. It is also an unintentional slap in the face for the opposition camp, complaining about "dwindling autonomy" and "increasing interference by the central government". Apparently the "pan-democracy" parties cannot live without foreign interference like this - which Beijing has every right to oppose and denounce. 
Meanwhile, in Taipei the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) once again displayed its resentment for true democracy. During the weekend it blocked entry into the Legislative Yuan's assembly hall to prevent the legislature re-examining the Cross-Straits Service Trade Agreement (CSSTA) clause by clause - as demanded by the "Sunflower Student Movement". The student protesters, instead of welcoming the government's show of respect for popular wishes, followed the DPP line by continuing to camp outside the Legislative Yuan. Their contradictory behavior is further proof they have been used by the DPP to derail the CSSTA without actually knowing why, or how bad they look in doing so. They were told their actions were in defense of democracy. But the opposite is really the case. This is why more members of the public in Taiwan are criticizing the DPP and the anti-CSSTA student movement for self-indulgence at the expense of democracy and the rule of law. 
Both events offer indisputable evidence that democracy is the real victim during these political battles for power. They also prove once again that sometimes the loudest advocates of "true democracy" are its worst enemies. They violate the principles of democracy by twisting them left and right to serve their personal interests. That such ill-motivated parties are often cheered on and aided by foreign powers only makes it that easier for public to see their truly undemocratic nature. 

(HK Edition 04/08/2014 page9)

