



The first direct dialogue between the SAR government and leaders of the Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) on Tuesday failed to achieve anything positive. Personally, I was disappointed but not surprised. Chief Secretary Carrie Lam did her best as head of the Task Force on Constitutional Development. She made a good attempt to explain the government's position on contentious issues, but HKFS leaders ignored her, insisting instead upon their own unconstitutional demands and illegal methods to achieve them. Both sides knew, as did the public watching on TV, that the talks had no chance of success. 
People had hoped something positive might emerge. The occupiers now have another excuse to ruin any chance of Hong Kong enjoying universal suffrage for the 2017 Chief Executive election. Illegal protests and increasingly unpopular mob-type behavior has brought this about. 
The HKFS leaders boasted several times in their speeches on Tuesday that many protesters are on the streets right now demanding "real universal suffrage" in the form of "public nomination". They are prepared to "shed blood" for the cause. I have little doubt some of them might want to "fight to the death" and become martyrs. 
But I wonder how their families and friends view this. What do 7 million Hong Kong residents feel about the conduct of the protesters? How do the HKFS leaders think the ill-advised protesters compared with millions of people who want the "umbrella revolution" to end? 
One of the more fanciful slogans chanted by the occupiers early on in the protests was "Our fate in our hands!" The first question that comes to mind is: "Do they even know what fate is?" Today, I am still waiting for someone to explain how "Occupy Central" will benefit us when it is clearly hurting our interests. And we cannot do anything about it. Their advocacy of democracy is absurd, as a registered voter, I would never vote for such people. 
None of the leading occupiers have explained what the word "fate" exactly means in today's context. Perhaps it means whatever they decide to do and no one can stop them. They know what they are doing is illegal. It is hurting the very people whose support they need most, but they don't care. 
HKFS Secretary-General Chow Yong-kang won applause from his followers when, during the discussions, he attacked the current composition of the Election Committee for selecting the Chief Executive (CE). He said public nomination would end the domination of corporate interests in the selection of the CE. 
This idea may appeal to many under-privileged members of society, but it is nothing new in Western democracies. People in the West also want to reduce the influence of corporate interests in politics, but, of course, they can't. 
Does Chow believe Hong Kong will achieve the impossible while the rest of the capitalist world can only dream about it? Is the real target of the "umbrella revolution" capitalism itself - including the rule of law and political establishment? 
I don't know whether the occupiers realize that their "true democracy" is not democracy in its purest form - which is "direct" instead of "representative democracy". Now that they have gone this far, I suggest they demand the abolition of the Legislative Council as well. No way! I hear them cry. That would be fine with me, but what would they do if someone convinced 200,000 or more people to join a similar "civil disobedience" movement and block traffic to their homes in the name of "pure democracy"? This exposes the folly and hypocrisy of their actions. 
If the occupiers genuinely believe they act in the name of "real universal suffrage", I assume most of them are aware that very few of the Western democracies have "public nomination" as part of their electoral systems. In the case of both the US and the UK, they have yet to implement "real universal suffrage" in elections for their heads of government. None of these "leading democracies" would let something like the "umbrella revolution" last as long as it has. Don't tell me "Occupy Wall Street" did. That movement was nothing like "Occupy Central" in the first place. But it was also forcibly ended by New York's police officers on the orders of Mayor Michael Bloomberg - a very successful billionaire politician. 
The "Occupy" protesters are naive, ignorant of political reality and also clearly know little of how political systems operate in other countries. So their statement that "Our fate is in our hands" is absurd. 
The author is a current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 10/27/2014 page9)

