


      The on-going political circus that is "Occupy Central" has cost Hong Kong tens of billions of dollars in financial losses over the past nine days. The illegal acts by the protesters have been insidiously described as "civil disobedience". This was to deceive the public at home and overseas.
      
        The fact is that many protesters brought umbrellas with metal poles and spokes that can easily injure, or even kill another person. The organizers said the umbrellas were for protection when police used pepper spray on the protesters. But it has been suggested that many protesters used umbrellas as weapons to attack police officers first. Some deliberately aimed pointed metal poles at police officers' eyes. Dozens of officers received injuries from these "peaceful umbrellas", including a long gash to a policeman's arm which required more than 10 stitches. It was these premeditated assaults which provoked the use of tear gas by the police to repel the attackers. They intended to provoke the authorities with violent acts all along. This was a decision that mocked the principles of non-violent protest and civil disobedience.
        
          The protesters also set up camp in public thoroughfares to block traffic and deny other people access to various destinations. They effectively limited the freedom of movement of millions and the right of many people to do business or earn a living. That is another gross violation of the spirit of civil disobedience. Mahatma Gandhi, father of the largest civil disobedience movement in modern history, would be turning in his grave.
          
            The "occupiers" are not the only ones who have wantonly trampled other people's individual rights. Some "pan-democrat" lawmakers, who are obligated to serve the public unconditionally, also mocked concept of civil disobedience by offering their offices in Legislative Council (LegCo) building for use by the protesters 24/7. It is common knowledge that LegCo members are public servants. They have no right to use their offices, which are public property, for purposes unrelated to their jobs. Moreover, the protesters were there to make members of the public suffer. Is there any action more insulting to the spirit of civil disobedience than this?
            
              The continuing law-breaking of "Occupy" has taken the anti-democratic abuse of power known as the "tyranny of the minority" to new levels in Hong Kong. No matter when and how it is subdued the people of Hong Kong will have to decide whether they want to maintain the rule of law. This is because such illegal campaigns are bound to happen again and again until public consensus is reached on banning them for good and trusting the police to enforce the law by any means necessary.
              
                Although we are in favor of treating most of the students taking part in illegal activities with reasonable leniency and educating them to become law-abiding citizens we cannot allow such destructive illegal movements to continue. These have already hit Hong Kong's economy to the tune of tens of billions of dollars. The time has come for all Hong Kong residents to decide whether they want to live their lives peacefully - free of political abuse - by enforcing the rule of law or submit to the selfish whims of political opportunists employing mob politics.
                
                  If we want true democracy, peace and prosperity we must maintain social stability, initially through the rule of law. This requires all members of society to abide by existing laws. We have to trust the police and courts to do their jobs without interference.
                  
                    The author is a veteran journalist based in Hong Kong.
                    
(HK Edition 10/08/2014 page7)

