 



Zhang Xiaoming, director of the Central People's Government's Liaison Office in the HKSAR, reiterated on Thursday that the central government's Hong Kong policy and commitment to "One Country, Two Systems" remains unchanged. 
He stressed that this commitment would continue - even if implementation of universal suffrage, according to the Basic Law, is not realized in 2017. Zhang also said the HKSAR's constitutional reform should take into consideration the country's national security. 
Zhang's comments are a timely reminder that the central government remains committed to the "One Country, Two Systems" policy in the HKSAR. This commitment remains - no matter how much internal and external forces try to undermine it. Hong Kong is an inseparable part of China. The future of the city depends on the stability and development of the country. Hong Kong's relationship with the mainland will in future be even closer. No one can deny or change this. 
Hong Kong has to protect national security for its own sake, as well as for that of the nation. No matter where in the world one looks, democracy is never in conflict with national security. The latter will always take precedence at times of emergencies such as wars and natural disasters. Without national security everything else risks falling part - including the normal functions of a democratic system. National security is paramount and immune to ideological differences and political rivalries. Anyone who doubts this only needs to recall how quickly the US Congress passed the "Patriot Act" after the 9/11 terror attacks. 
There are those who have been trying to convince Hong Kong residents they can do anything they want to gain "true democracy". This would appear to include attempts to turn Hong Kong into an independent political entity and a base for foreign forces intent on destabilizing the mainland, in the name of freedom and democracy. This is deception. It is designed to dupe Hongkongers into serving the interests of some Western powers and their cronies. 
People should ask themselves whether they are willing to jeopardize national security by letting someone opposed to the central government run for Chief Executive. Before subscribing to terms like "genuine universal suffrage" and "international standards" they should ask people advocating these slogans an important question. They should ask them if they would be prepared to embrace a China as "democratic, free and powerful" as the United States? They would most likely say this is impossible. They would probably give any answer except "yes". 

(HK Edition 08/08/2014 page9)

