 



Chief Secretary Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor's initiative to facilitate informal discussions between the Liaison Office and legislative councilors from the opposition parties is a timely and constructive move to help solve the current impasse over political reform. 
The opposition parties have insisted on adopting an election mechanisms for the 2017 Chief Executive Election that obviously contravene the stipulations of the Basic Law and decisions of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC), which the central and the HKSAR governments have been vigorously defending as their bottom line. 
A solution to the impasse and a package for universal suffrage will by no means be achieved until the three stakeholders - the Legislative Council, the executive branch of the HKSAR government and the NPCSC - settle their differences and agree on a final package as required by the Basic Law. 
The central government has reiterated its sincerity for facilitating political reform and implementing universal suffrage for the election of the Chief Executive in 2017. To show its sincerity, the Liaison Office last month suggested having a dinner gathering with all legislative councilors from the opposition parties, inviting them all to its Spring Festival reception early this month. 
Unfortunately, the dinner initiative failed as many opposition councilors did not show up in the Spring Festival reception. Many are reluctant to have direct contact with Liaison officials, for fears of being attacked by radical members of their own camp. 
Lam's proposed dinner gatherings will provide a useful platform for both sides to exchange views, and hopefully afford opportunities for them to bargain on issues regarding political reform in Hong Kong. The informal nature of the anticipated contact will minimize the odds that participating opposition councilors will be attacked by their radical peers in the opposition camp. 
Now that the central and the HKSAR governments have demonstrated their sincerity and initiative, are members of the opposition parties ready to show theirs? 
Members of the opposition have always promoted themselves as supporters of democracy. It's a widely accepted maxim that no democracy works without compromise. 
For the sake of implementing smooth political reforms in Hong Kong and the benefits of Hong Kong people, the opposition is obliged to receive the ball now in their court. 

(HK Edition 02/24/2014 page1)

