


      A person's sex drive is a sign of vitality. We are pleased to see a lot of both in Albert Ho Chun-yan, who at the age of 63 still has the thirst for photos of bikini-clad teen models despite his heavy workload as a legislative councilor. His apologies to us were unnecessary, as it is well-known how hard it was - even for a person who is remunerated monthly with $80,465 - to sit through the long and boring budget speech. In any case, the incident makes Ho more human. If he can be a champion of democracy, so can millions of other Internet porn lovers in the city.
      
        How can Ho manage to be so lively despite his age and the numerous public offices? There must be a secret behind his dynamism, and recent events gave us a glimpse of things Ho might be doing right to maintain high energy levels.
        
          In March 28, 17 pan-democrats, including five legislators, have started an indefinite fast in Central to campaign for universal suffrage. Albert Ho was one of the participants. Tents have been set up outside the HSBC's headquarters. Strikers are relying only on water and sports drinks.
          
            Following a doctor's advice, Ho resumed eating after about 100 hours. He told the press he suffered from diarrhea and a mild headache. For us who have experienced fasting, those were clear signs Ho's body was detoxifying.
            
              Historically, man lived on a sparse diet, free from pesticides, food additives, drugs and toxins. Today, we consume more toxic substances than all the generations before us. Through polluted air, processed food and other chemicals that surround us, toxins are constantly being absorbed into our bodies.
              
                When we are awake and active, our body has to prioritize its energy levels for our conscious activities. The body also has to digest food we regularly consume, and the digestion process prevents our body repairing itself. Our body has a brief opportunity to clean up while we sleep. Breakfast is appropriately named, as it breaks the nightly fast with a morning meal. When we wake up, our tongues are often coated, and we may also experience foul breath, puffy skin and foggy minds. These are early symptoms of detoxification, the process through which our body eliminates harmful toxins and other waste products.
                
                  The medical benefits of fasting are controversial, and there certainly are risks involved, especially if the fast is conducted inappropriately. According to the fasting and detoxification philosophy, Ho was apparently doing a few things right. First, he was not on a water-only fast, which usually provokes a more violent cleansing response, and is not recommended for beginners. The energy drinks he was taking make the process akin to a juice fast, and make the cleansing responses a lot milder and pleasant.
                  
                    Second, he did the hunger strike well before the LegCo Shanghai trip, which he may or may not be joining. But in case he joins, he has allowed his body sufficient time to break the fast. When Ho resumed eating, it was important to ease his body back into the process of digesting regular foods. Because his digestive system has most likely reduced enzyme production, this affected the mucus lining in his stomach, overeating or ingesting certain foods too quickly may cause him to experience health problems such as nausea or stomach aches. Introducing regular foods slowly and strategically will help him break the fast safely, so he can enjoy the good food Shanghai has to offer. That is if he joins the trip, of course.
                    
                      For people undertaking hunger strikes indefinitely, where they have skipped eating on and off, or passing the baton to other members, they may benefit from the experiences of people who have performed intermittent fasting - a new and controversial diet now in vogue, which moves from a period of fasting to a period of non-fasting.
                      
                        To achieve the optimal detoxification effect, Ho should have refrained from ingesting solid food for a few more days. But he was on a hunger strike - not fasting. It is still advisable he explore these cleansing philosophies, as he is currently overweight.
                        
                          The author is a current affairs commentator.
                          
(HK Edition 04/04/2014 page9)

