 
During the consultation period the government had a slogan: "Let's talk and achieve universal suffrage". 
In the spirit of the slogan, Chief Secretary for Administration Carrie Lam held a meeting with organizers of "Occupy Central" including Benny Tai, Chan Kin-man and Chu Yiu-ming. 
These three have been advised to abandon their illegal movement. But they remain intransigent. 
Benny Tai said the campaign "must take place" if the method to select the Chief Executive (CE) in 2017 does not conform to "international standards". But he failed to say what these standards were. 
Knowing the campaign is illegal supporters of "Occupy Central" have attempted to give it an air of legitimacy by saying they have a "moral obligation" to demand "genuine" universal suffrage. They have even attempted to delude the public by comparing their campaign with Martin Luther King's civil rights movement and Mahatma Gandhi's campaign for Indian independence. It is important that we properly differentiate "Occupy Central" from these two historic civil disobedience movements. 



There is actually no comparison. Martin Luther King fought against injustices, which breached the US Constitution. But "Occupy Central" is a protest against the enforcement of Hong Kong's mini-constitution - the Basic Law. In the 1860s, three amendments to the US Constitution were passed, namely: ending slavery, giving African-Americans citizenship, and allowing African-American males to vote. Yet racial segregation, exploitation and violence against African-Americans were still commonplace in the southern part of the US during King's time. "One hundred years later, the Negro still is not free", King said in his famous speech "I Have a Dream". Because of this, civil disobedience was essential in fighting for the constitutional rights of African-Americans. But in Hong Kong there is no mention of "public nomination" in the Basic Law. Supporters of "Occupy Central" insist on public nomination, which has no constitutional basis. Therefore, they are displaying a complete lack of respect for the Basic Law. 
In the India of Gandhi's time, it is true that what he fought for was not enshrined in the constitutional laws of the then British colony. Gandhi was struggling against British colonial rule. Therefore, civil disobedience was justified because it was a movement against a foreign ruler to achieve independence. "Occupy Central", however, isn't concerned with obtaining independence from colonial rule. It could be seen as more of an attempt to attract foreign intervention - rather than to expel it. 
Gandhi's initially peaceful campaign did on several occasions lead to violent clashes with the authorities. He had to call off major campaigns due to outbreaks of violence. In Hong Kong, with large numbers of people blocking traffic in Central, the "Occupy Central" movement will also find it difficult ensuring its protest remains peaceful. 
During the meeting with Carrie Lam, Benny Tai questioned the validity of the anti-"Occupy Central" petition initiated by the Alliance for Peace and Democracy. But he praised the "6.22 Civil Referendum" arguing it was far "more than asking people to sign (a petition) on the streets". 
I believe the validity of the "6.22 Civil Referendum" is far more questionable. This is because it advocated unconstitutional political mechanisms. Firstly, four options for nomination for the CE election in 2017 were available to voters: the Alliance for True Democracy proposal, the People Power proposal, the Scholarism proposal, and abstention. The first three proposals contained elements of "public nomination". Voters who supported the Basic Law were left with no choice but to abstain. 
Without other options for Hong Kong voters, the poll could not be considered a genuine "referendum". It appears that what they really wanted was consensus within the opposition camp, rather than the population of Hong Kong. 
Secondly, the poll asked whether the Legislative Council (LegCo) should veto proposals which do not meet international standards. As Hong Kong observes international standards in financial regulations, infrastructure, technology, food safety, Hong Kong people tend to hold international standards in high regard. But there are no accepted international standards regarding nomination of the CE. It is misleading to demand something that does not exist. Even if these "international standards" did exist, the Basic Law would still prevail over them. 
Like Martin Luther King, Hong Kong people also have a dream - a dream of having universal suffrage for the CE election in accordance with the Basic Law in 2017. But unlike King most Hong Kong people want this achieved without resorting to civil disobedience. 
The author is a HK veteran commentator and professor at the Research Center of Hong Kong and Macao Basic Law, Shenzhen University. 

(HK Edition 08/04/2014 page9)

