


      The mass protests in Admiralty and Wan Chai spilled over into Causeway Bay, the busiest shopping district in Hong Kong, and Mong Kok, the bargain-hunters' paradise in Kowloon, on Sunday.
      
        In less than two days the class-boycotting students seemed to have abandoned their demands for direct dialogue with Chief Executive (CE) Leung Chun-ying and the withdrawal of the decision by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) on universal suffrage in Hong Kong after their organized protests were technically replaced by "Occupy Central".
        
          Some of them are now demanding the immediate resignation of CE Leung, as the 23 "pan-democrat" legislative councilors announced Monday morning they will table a motion to impeach Leung.
          
            What the 23 opposition lawmakers did not tell the public is that their impeachment motion is nothing but a political gesture designed to show they are still somehow relevant. Surely they must know there is no way they can muster the necessary majority to put an impeachment motion on the legislative agenda, let alone achieve their goal. I guess they were convinced the public already knew that and would not expect much from them anyway. Nevertheless they still owe Hong Kong society an explanation as to why they believe anyone replacing Leung would be able to meet their unconstitutional demands.
            
              Meanwhile, Joshua Wong Chi-fung, teenage convener of the radical secondary school student group Scholarism, asserted on Monday that the organizations that initiated the mass protests, including Scholarism, are no longer in a position to run the show and CE Leung is the only person who can end the crisis. However Wong neither gave any suggestion as to how this might occur nor admitted he agreed with the calls for Leung's resignation.
              
                Chan Kin-man, one of the three leading "occupiers", also claimed on Monday morning television that the crowds blocking traffic in Admiralty, Wan Chai, Causeway Bay and Mong Kok had joined "Occupy" spontaneously. Reading between the lines, so to speak, I sense an attempt, at least on Wong and Chan's part, to dodge responsibility for the mess.
                
                  Aside from whether that is what they meant, I reckon they have the right to speak for themselves. However, do they now agree that by emphasizing the spontaneity of the masses, they essentially suggest it is every man for himself? If so, what role do they think the "Occupy" campaign will play from now on? And do all the opposition parties or all the participants of the mass protests in the streets right now, agree with them? What will they do if they cannot reach some kind of consensus...? Let the chaotic situation continue or even deteriorate?
                  
                    It is unclear whether those demanding the CE's resignation know how the SAR government operates without a CE; and there is no indication they actually care. That is a huge problem in itself. Some dissident commentators believe Leung should resign immediately, but no one has bothered to inform the public that according to the law as it stands, nobody within the SAR government has the power to do anything more than Leung can at present.
                    
                      That leaves the question: What exactly do the opposition and in particular the organizers of "Occupy" want for Hong Kong? Could they please tell the people of Hong Kong what exactly "true democracy" is and how it works! The organizers of the student strike and "Occupy" literally portray themselves as a bunch of clueless hooligans following orders from shady bosses unwilling to reveal their identities or give them further instructions.
                      
                        Everything points to their having resigned without losing the credibility and trust of their followers. If only politics were that simple! The hard reality is, because they told neither the public, nor the passionate but ill-informed youth, what exactly "true democracy" or "genuine universal suffrage" were, they are obliged to continue acting as "unofficial" spokespersons, and as such they are at the very least accountable for what they say. Can they or would they do that? I sincerely hope they will.
                        
                          Shortly after 4 pm on Monday "Occupy" initiator Benny Tai finally reappeared in front of TV cameras in Admiralty, looking tired but happy. He shouted empty slogans in melodramatic fashion, presumably to convince the crowd they had won - whatever he believed they thought "winning" was. He was followed by fellow "Occupy" initiator Chu Yiu-ming, who basically repeated what Tai said without adding anything substantial. They both then hurriedly left without answering reporters' questions. It seemed they had indeed settled for the role of cheerleaders rather than organizers.
                          
                            It appears that the average protester still blocking traffic at the "hot spots" mentioned above are left to make their own decisions on what to do if their unrealistic, unconstitutional demands are rejected by the central authorities and SAR government.
                            
                              The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                              
(HK Edition 10/03/2014 page4)

