
Over the past four years, Wang Ming, a member of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, made several proposals to relax China's family planning policy. 
His efforts were not in vain. China formally approved easing its one-child policy on Dec 28, allowing couples to have two children if one of the parents is an only child. 
"We really made history!" Wang said excitedly. 
As director of the NGO Research Center at the Tsinghua University, he believes that the CPPCC is the most effective mechanism to influence government policies under the Chinese political system. 
"I really cherish my identity as a member of the CPPCC and will try my best to use this identity to influence policy-making. I feel deeply that we will have a great influence on policies while China is comprehensively deepening reforms," he said. 
In 2013, he submitted 16 proposals. Two were listed as key proposals by the CPPCC National Committee and Ministry of Civil Affairs. 
This year, he will put forward about 25 proposals. 
Starting in December, he spent a month selecting topics. Then a group of postdoctoral scholars helped with research and writing before final drafts were completed. 
"I do hope some of the proposals will make a difference," he said. "Government departments are taking the voices of CPPCC members more seriously." 
A three-time member of the CPPCC, he attended several meetings of the body last year, including a discussion on increasing controls over vehicle exhaust emissions. 
The CPPCC, which established a system to hold consultative forums every two weeks, plans to hold about 20 forums a year and invite 20 National Committee members to each forum to have face-to-face exchanges, thus providing a platform for 400 National Committee members from different sectors to express their views annually. 
So far, it has held six such forums, with topics ranging from the macro-economic situation to nuclear power and clean energy. 
Liu Jiayi, research director of the General Office of the CPPCC National Committee, said holding biweekly consultative forums is "a huge innovation of the system of the CPPCC National Committee and a key step forward from the CPPCC last year". 
He recalled that during a forum on nuclear power and clean energy, He Zuoxiu, a senior physicist and member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, rose from his chair to debate with another CPPCC member. 
"The spirit of democracy penetrated our forums. They obey the truth, whether the speaker is a leader or a small potato," he said at a news conference at the second session of the 12th CPPCC National Committee on Friday. 
The CPPCC used to hold a conference for National Committee members only once a year. During the rest of the year, many members - especially those who do not live in Beijing - didn't get to attend meetings or activities of the CPPCC National Committee. 
"By establishing the system of biweekly consultative forums, we are able to institutionalize consultative democracy and make it a regular practice," said Liu. 
jiangxueqing@chinadaily.com.cn 






 
CPPCC members (starting second from left) Li Dongdong, Liu Jiayi, Bian Jinping, Lai Ming attend a news conference on Friday in Beijing. Wang Jing / China Daily
(China Daily USA 03/10/2014 page5)
