 
The Alliance for True Democracy proposed a "three-track" nomination system on Jan 8. Instead of just "civil nomination", the proposal consists of "civil nomination", party nominations and selections by individual members of the Nominating Committee (NC), rather the committee collectively. 
With the first track, one can become a Chief Executive (CE) nominee by getting the support of one percent of 3.5 million registered voters. Following the second track, political parties with at least 5 percent of the geographical votes in last Legislative Council (LegCo) election are allowed to nominate a candidate on their own or jointly. The third track tends to adopt Annex I of the Basic Law in the place of Article 45 of the same law. I believe the proposal profanes rather than cherishes the Basic Law. 
I think it is good to clear a few hurdles at the early stages. It would be beneficial to deal with any contentious issues now and guide the public onto the right track, free from any undue influence from politicians. I agree with Justice Secretary Rimsky Yuen Kwok-keung's statement on Jan 9 that if the decision exercised by the NC was reduced to a formality it would contravene the Basic Law. 
According to Article 45 of the Basic Law, the CE nominees should be nominated by "a broadly representative Nominating Committee in accordance with democratic procedures". This implies that the "democratic procedure" should be exercised by the NC, collectively. 
While the concept of "broadly representative" is not going to be discussed in this article, a resolution of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC) in 2007 has confirmed that reference should be made to formation of the Election Committee as stated in Annex I of the Basic Law. The NC should, therefore, be composed of representatives from four sectors, which are: the business sector, the professional sector, the labour, social services and religious sector, and the political sector. 



That is to say, the method of nomination of the CE by universal suffrage should follow Article 45 of the Basic Law, while the formation of the NC should refer to Annex I of the same law. 
Because of the rule of law, the exercise of public power and rights, including nomination of CE candidates can only be justified with reference to the appropriate constitutional documents. While not contravening the Basic Law is necessary, it is not sufficient. Any NC not composed of the four sectors, and any nomination method not conducted by a "broadly representative Nominating Committee" with "democratic procedure" as stated in Article 45 of the Basic Law, defies the rule of law. It is unconstitutional, and the three-track proposal is an example of this. 
"Civil nomination" cannot be reasonably regarded in the same way as representative nomination. The former involves the participation of a certain percentage of individuals. The latter requires the participation of a group of carefully selected or elected delegates. They represent the entire pool of the whole populace beyond registered voters. To put it bluntly, when everyone is representative, no one will be! 
One percent of the 3.5 million registered voters will amount to 35,000 people. Given that the number is much greater for those who run for the LegCo and District Council elections, it poses a new administrative challenge. It is difficult, if not impossible, to check the validity of all identities and signatures of nominators within a nomination period of two or three weeks. Because multiple nominations by the same person and false identities may be produced without prior scrutiny, "civil nomination" seems to be unrealistic. 
Party nomination can hardly be considered to be broadly representative. Few political parties are dedicated to serving the common interests of Hong Kong society at large. Most political parties are supported by only a small percentage of registered voters in Hong Kong. As a result of their distinctive political and socio-economic ideologies, political parties in Hong Kong appear to represent a limited spectrum of society. Moreover, the views of the silent majority who do not register, or vote in the election, have not been effectively represented by political parties. 
With a low threshold of 5 percent of the geographical votes in the previous LegCo election, more than a half of the political parties in Hong Kong may qualify to nominate candidates. Unfortunately, Hong Kong lacks comprehensive regulations for political parties. Most, if not all, political parties in Hong Kong are companies limited by guarantee, which can be set up with minimal cost, normally taking only one to two months to register. It is unrealistic to expect such political parties have the necessary qualities to nominate candidates for the highest office in the SAR in the best interests of the people. 
The author is a HK veteran commentator and professor at the Research Center of Hong Kong and Macao Basic Law, Shenzhen University. 

(HK Edition 01/16/2014 page1)

