
Editor's note: President Xi Jinping has referred to Deng Xiaoping's ideas many times in the past decade, when Xi was Party chief of Zhejiang province. Through public speeches or newspapers articles, Xi told officials that it was Deng who had spearheaded reform and opening-up and improved the lives of the Chinese people. These references include: 
"Comrade Deng Xiao-ping has reiterated many times that stability is the top priority. Without a stable environment, we can hardly make any achievements, and the progress we have made will be lost." 
During a conference in Zhejiang province on May 10, 2004, when Xi was the provincial Party secretary. 
"Comrade Deng Xiaoping has stressed that socialist democracy and legislation are closely related, and that we should make a set of laws, regulations and rules to legitimize democracy." 
At a seminar of the Zhejiang Provincial People's Congress, the local legislature, on Sept 14, 2004. 
"We should have our own 'key products' and establish our own world-renowned brands, or we will be bullied by others." 
Quoting Deng's speech during a visit to South China's Guangdong province in 1992 as he urged local officials and entrepreneurs to build up more famous brands, at an economic conference in Zhejiang province on Dec 20, 2004. 
"I am a son of the Chinese people. I love my country and people deeply." 
Quoting Deng's famous words in an article to urge officials to get close to the people. The article was published in Zhejiang Daily on July 17, 2003. 
"Comrade Deng Xiaoping said that study is the basis for progress; and when facing new problems, our Party should keep studying, the Party members should keep studying, and we Chinese should keep studying." 
From an article quoting what Deng had said in May 1951. The article was published on March 29, 2004, in Zhejiang Daily. 
"In the early 1980s, Comrade Deng Xiaoping pointed out the harmful effects of officials' privileges. He said, 'Some leaders deem themselves as lords, rather than servants of the people. They enjoy privileges, which has caused dissatisfaction among the people and ruined the Party's image. If this situation does not change, our leaders will be facing corruption.'" 
From an article quoting Deng's words in August 1980. The article urging officials to serve the people was published in Zhejiang Daily on Feb 5, 2007. 

(China Daily USA 08/22/2014 page5)

