 



Change for the better 
Addressing audiences in an electoral reform debate at Wai Chai District Council on Tuesday, Raymond Tam Chi-yuen, the secretary for constitutional and mainland affairs, said the methods for selecting the Chief Executive, even after achieving universal suffrage in 2017, could still be amended and improved. 
Tam's remarks sounds enlightening and constructive, and are set to be echoed by the mainstream opinion, because this will create greater room for compromise, and allow the public more time to develop a consensus while practicing democracy. 
It is true the electoral method introduced initially might not be perfect, but there is no need to assume it can't be changed after 2017. Keeping abreast of the times is part of Hong Kong's world-renown "Can Do" spirit. 
Opposition and pro-establishment camps have been locking horns with each other for some time over how to return the Chief Executive by universal suffrage. The most controversial factors are the makeup of the Nominating Committee and the nominating procedure for the Chief Executive candidates. At this critical juncture, it is in society's best interests for the moderate opposition members to embrace the spirit of rule of law by accepting the legal framework laid down in the Basic Law, which clearly stipulates that the Nominating Committee is the only authority able to select Chief Executive candidates. Being law-abiding and pragmatic is the only way to make a dialogue with the central government. Any other irrational approach will only prove to be counterproductive and time-wasting. 
Up to now, perhaps it is too early to jump to the conclusion that universal suffrage for 2017 Chief Executive is heading for a dead end - the situation is not yet "desperate". However, as the SAR government's five-month public consultation on political reform is soon coming to an end, public opinion over how to conduct universal suffrage still remains poles apart. If all the stakeholders across the political spectrum fail to break the gridlock, Hong Kong's democratic dream will be nothing more than a mirage, and everyone is a loser. 
Chief Secretary for Administration Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor's warning last week still resonates in the city: 2017 universal suffrage in Hong Kong risks being turned into "flowers in the mirror, a moon in the water". To avoid a "life-or-death" scenario on the political battleground, a consensus in society is desperately needed. Embroiling in bitter squabbles and dwelling on unrealistic and irrational ideas will lead to nowhere. 
As Hong Kong advances to democracy, while being flexible and ready for change, it is wise for our fellow citizens to always remember that whatever the change might be, it must take place within the framework of the Basic Law. And it must take into account Hong Kong's well-being and national interest. 

(HK Edition 03/12/2014 page1)

