 
Benny Tai Yiu-ting is very cunning. Perhaps he does not lie, but he only emphasizes on parts of the truth that is the least relevant. He made the world refer to the little voting game that he and his friends are having as a "referendum". We are led to believe that the word "referendum" is in quote because of its unofficial nature. The fact is, it does not resemble anything close to a referendum, not even conceptually. It is not even qualified as an opinion poll as some of our dissidents would concede as participants are not representative of the Hong Kong population. 
According to the Macmillan dictionaries, a referendum is "an occasion when everyone in a country can vote to make a decision about one particular subject." The Cambridge dictionaries refer it as "a vote in which all the people in a country or an area are asked to give their opinion about or decide an important political or social question." 
From a political philosophical perspective, referendums are an expression of direct democracy. It means returning the right of decision-making for the most important public affairs to the most basic unit of modern society - the individual. This is exactly and decidedly what the "Occupy Central" voting is not. 
Two questions are asked in the "Occupy" poll. Residents can choose either one motion to vote on, or vote for both motions. The first question asks which of the proposals the voter would like the "Occupy" to submit to the government for Chief Executive election in 2017. The choices available are the "Alliance for True Democracy" proposal, the People Power proposal, the students' proposal, and "abstention". 



People complained about the limited number of proposals to choose from, but the even more tricky part is the option to abstain. According to the official voting site (popvote.hk), "Occupy Central Secretariat will choose the proposal which obtained the highest number of votes as the proposal Occupy Central supports and endorses, regardless of the percentage of abstain vote, blank vote or invalid vote." 
In order words, votes that were casted last week do not carry equal weight. And the irony is that this poll is designed by people who claim they care about universality and equality. Apparently, if you choose wrong, they will ignore you. This design naturally discourages people who are against "Occupy" from participating, and therefore the percentage of abstain vote becomes meaningless. 
A referendum, legally binding or not, gives everyone a genuine choice. The "Occupy" vote ignores those that do not share its ideology, and therefore it is nothing but a pledge of determination. It is not unlike virginity pledges (also known as abstinence pledges), commitments made by teenagers and young adults to refrain from sexual intercourse until marriage that are common in the United States, especially among Catholic and Evangelical Christian denominations. The virginity pledge has no place for the non-believers or those who are not against pre-marital sex; the "Occupy" vote has no place for those who are not democracy zealots. 
Conceptual difficulties aside, the "Occupy" vote is fraught with methodological issues in its voting arrangement. I have explained the loopholes here last week, and they are widely exposed and discussed elsewhere in details, but dissident-leaning local media and foreign press deliberately ignore this critical aspect. 
CloudFlare, the US Web company that runs the servers hosting the online voting system has links with US intelligence agencies, according to a report from Sing Tao Daily last Wednesday. CloudFlare formed close ties with the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) after helping the CIA ward off attacks by the infamous international hacking group LulzSec. CloudFlare was used by LulzSec to protect itself as it launched a series of high-profile attacks in 2011, and it was caught in a crossfire between the CIA and LulzSec. It appeared to have ditched LulzSec and befriended the CIA. The "Occupy" shouldn't have trusted this double agent with Hongkongers' personal information, including identity card numbers. 
The "Occupy" campaign announced the voting results on Sunday. Before we debate on the interpretation of the numbers, we should bear in mind the very high possibility that the votes have been tempered. The organizers alleged there have been repeated cyber-attacks on the voting site. Who knows what the effect of those attacks are, and whether they haven't tried to do some cooking on the numbers themselves with the help of CloudFlare? I am sure if they like the numbers they will tell us that the cyber-attacks have not caused any harm. This is a classic "head I win, tail you lose" game. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 06/30/2014 page1)

