
An opinion poll run from Aug 31 to Sep 3, sponsored by TVB and conducted by the Public Governance Programme at Lingnan University, showed that Hong Kong has become even more polarized over constitutional development. 
The number of people who accept or reject the decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) on Aug 31; the number of people who want the Legislative Council (LegCo) to approve or veto the reform package based on the NPCSC's decision; the number of people who think the bill will be passed by the LegCo and the number of people who don't, are nearly all of the same proportion. A lack of majority support for the NPCSC decision means a deal on the 2017 Chief Executive (CE) election by "one-person, one-vote" seems impossible. 
The opposition camp, astonished by the NPCSC's decision, ruled out the opportunity to run for CE, and declared a series of disruptive acts. The Hong Kong Federation of Students announced a week-long student strike starting on Sept 22. The "Occupy Central" organizers told the public they are now counting down their "nuclear bomb". The two leading opposition political groups - the Democratic Party and the Civic Party - said they would boycott the second public consultation on the method for electing the CE in 2017. Apparently some members of the opposition camp now find themselves on the tiger's back, as a Chinese idiom goes. They cannot dismount without being bitten. Political circumstances are now forcing the opposition camp to go down the radical route. Internally, the opposition, both political organizations and individuals, now believe if they want to win the 2015 district council elections and 2016 LegCo election they will have to firmly oppose Beijing to remain popular with their supporters. 
Externally, the opposition is also under great pressure from their foreign supporters. On Sept 4, Britain's Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) issued a statement on the NPCSC's decision. It was only one day after Chris Patten, the last colonial governor of Hong Kong, wrote in the Financial Times urging London to stand up to Beijing as it had a "moral duty and obligation" to Hong Kong. The FCO statement is really a typical diplomatic statement. On the one hand, it said: "We welcome the confirmation that China's objective is for the election of Hong Kong's Chief Executive through universal suffrage." But, on the other hand, it expressed sympathy with the opposition camp and their supporters: "While we recognize there is no perfect model, the important thing is that the people of Hong Kong have a genuine choice and a real stake in the outcome. We recognize that the detailed terms that the National People's Congress has set for the 2017 election will disappoint those who are arguing for a more open nomination process." 



The difference between Patten and the FCO is that Patten is a retired politician. He only cares about his own personal image as a "democratic reformer" when he was the governor; and the FCO, as an institution responsible for British's foreign affairs, has to look after the country's national interests. The FCO realizes London's stake in Hong Kong cannot be separated from Sino-British relations, hence the tongue-in-cheek statement. Some local media were disappointed with the FCO's statement, saying it was intended to defuse tensions between London and Beijing over an inquiry by the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee into the implementation of the Sino-British Joint Declaration. 
However, On Sept 5, Foreign Ministry spokesman Qin Gang reiterated: "We have clarified our principles and positions on the issue of Hong Kong's constitutional reform on multiple occasions. The British side also pledged that they had no intention of interfering in Hong Kong's constitutional reforms. However, the statement contains something that obviously runs counter to their pledge. It attempts to exert influence on the process of Hong Kong's constitutional reform - with which China expressed strong dissatisfaction. We hope the British side can truly respect China's sovereignty and relevant positions, and stick to their commitment and immediately stop interfering in Hong Kong's affairs." 
Foreign interference does not come from London alone. Pro-independence forces in Taiwan have vowed to back the opposition camp in Hong Kong. Yang Sen-hong, president of the Taiwan Association for China Human Rights and a top aide of former "vice-president" Annette Lu Hsiu-lien, said on Sept 4 that Taiwan activists helping "Occupy Central" have vowed to push the island's legislature to speed up deliberations on a new asylum bill. The bill would offer political asylum to any Hongkongers "persecuted in their fight for democracy". It is worth noting that the island's Mainland Affairs Council, which oversees cross-straits and Hong Kong affairs, confirmed that Taiwan's cabinet had already approved the asylum bill. 
The United States also provides considerable support to Hong Kong's opposition. On Sept 7, Susan Rice, senior aide to US President Barack Obama, made her maiden visit to Beijing. Diplomatic sources were quoted as saying before Rice's visit that she would talk about Hong Kong's political reform with her Chinese counterpart. 
Only when foreign meddling in Hong Kong stops can Hong Kong achieve universal suffrage according to the principle of "Love the Nation, Love Hong Kong". 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 09/12/2014 page10)

