 
There are two crucial issues which need to be discussed in regard to achieving universal suffrage for the Chief Executive (CE) election in 2017. One is formation of the Nominating Committee (NC) and the other is the meaning of nomination with democratic procedures. If Hong Kong society can reach a compromise on both issues, we will surely achieve CE universal suffrage in 2017. Otherwise, we will only have "flowers in the mirror or a moon in the water", as Chief Secretary Carrie Lam said. 
Political development is not always easy - judging from the experience of other countries and regions. More failure than success occurs around the world. Compared with other places, Hong Kong is lucky. It has certain advantages such as a framework for universal suffrage outlined in the Basic Law. Otherwise, Hong Kong would be led astray. On these foundations, CE universal suffrage can then be built. But without them any blueprint for reform cannot become a reality. 
However, Hong Kong also has some disadvantages. We are living in a diverse society with very different views across the political spectrum. Even within the framework of the Basic Law, there has been some confusion and chaos during the consultation period. 



So compromise is still very difficult - if not impossible to achieve. Four months have lapsed since the government published its consultation document. There has been little progress as different political forces from the opposition camp want something beyond the legislative perimeters outlined in the Basic Law. 
It is clear from the Basic Law that the NC should be "broadly representative" with representatives from the big four sectors of Hong Kong society. The first is the industrial, commercial and financial sector; the second is the professional sector; the third is labor, social services, religious and other sectors; and the fourth is various political sectors. 
Unfortunately, the Alliance for True Democracy insisted the committee should be formed by 3.5 million voters, and it demanded civil nomination by 1 percent of all voters. The Hong Kong 2020 demanded the unbalanced participation of the NC in which the fourth sector would be composed of 500 members - 200 more than the other three sectors. 
In reference to the previous selection and election committees, the words "broadly representative" should also apply to the NC. This means representatives from all economic, social and functional organizations and the people of Hong Kong. They should not simply be regarded as being elected by all voters. 
For instance, in the NC there are 60 members who are there as result of consultation with the six religious sectors. In the first sector, corporate votes from various industrial, commercial and financial groups are also allowed. This implies that the principles of individual voting rights cannot be directly applied to formation of the NC. But Hong Kong 2020 demanded abolition of all corporate votes, and 317 members to be subjected to universal suffrage from 18 geographical constituencies. It is virtually another demand for universal suffrage from the NC not required in the Basic Law. There is no such thing as "double universal suffrage" for the NC and the CE. 



As to "nomination with democratic procedures", one should perhaps refer to the Alternative 5 of Annex I of the Draft Basic Law (For Solicitation of Opinions). Paragraph 5 of this Alternative 5 confirms that the "Rules of the NC shall be prescribed by the laws of the HKSAR." 
By applying a literal interpretation, one can conclude that democratic procedures mean the prevalence of the majority. I believe there are three ways to apply this to majority rule. The first is by "absolute majority": Any participant who has acquired support from more than half of all NC members will become candidates. No quorum of candidates will need to be indicated. Another is by "relative majority": Several participants who gain greater support from the NC members will be candidates and the quorum will be determined beforehand. The last can be called a "synthetic majority" where all NC members will be asked to give "for", "against" or "abstain" votes to all participants. Several participants who have obtained higher scores within the quorum will become candidates. 
But Hong Kong 2020 disagrees. It prefers to use previous arrangements for the CE nomination. It simply forgets that one of the purposes of Hong Kong's current political development is to amend - through five steps - Annex I of the Basic Law along with the principles stipulated in Article 45. This is the only way to achieve universal suffrage for the CE in 2017. 
The author is an HK veteran commentator and professor at the Research Center of Hong Kong and Macao Basic Law, Shenzhen University. 

(HK Edition 03/31/2014 page1)

