
The campaign of occupying Taiwan's "legislature" by college students, backed by the opposition "green camp", has surprised the world. Taiwan seems to take the lead in practicing a multi-party system and electoral democracy in late 20th century. But, today the "showcase for democracy" has been heavily damaged and screwed up, says an article on 21ccom.net. Excerpts:
Since witnessing the first rotation of ruling parties in 2000, Taiwan's democracy has been trampled on and ravaged at least three times: the corruption case of the "president's gang", political gridlock caused by partisanship and the ongoing social anti-democratic movement that has occupied the "legislature" as a symbolic gesture.
The "president's gang", led by Chen Shui-bian, took Taiwan to be a cash machine and made huge unfair gains in the name of restructuring the financial sector. At that time, many Chinese mainland scholars still believed that this was the necessary cost of practicing democratic politics, as democracy is not immune to corruption and the rule of law under a democratic system can struggle against corruption. Taiwan scholars said people should be confident in Taiwan's democracy as realizing "people's authorization" through elections was pioneering work.
However, the elected representatives began to fall into partisanship, featuring no compromise and incivility. That the Democratic Progressive Party opposes any initiatives concerning the Chinese mainland turned Taiwan's partisanship into long-term political gridlock. Some may argue that partisanship is inevitable and cannot be separated from democracy. But partisanship without basic political consensus is bound to become a "partisan disaster", which will finally cause huge damage to the public.
Even worse, Taiwan's democracy has now been hijacked by the students' occupation of the "legislature", which directly goes against the spirit of democracy and rule of law. The occupy campaign has dealt a blow heavier than ever before to Taiwan's democracy.
If we see endless partisanship and political deadlock in Taiwan resulting in a bad democracy as an ill, then occupation of the "legislature" by some students means that Taiwan's democracy is hopeless. The occupy movement represents typical social, lawless and anarchical behavior.
Without the rule of law, any form of government is a bad one. A democracy without the rule of law is equivalent to a dictatorship by the mob, which has repeatedly turned up in history. The students' demand to deliberate on the Cross-Strait Service Agreement by them instead of the "legislature" goes against the spirit of rule of law, rationality and common sense. Therefore, their behavior is completely absurd. Who do they represent and who authorized them to be their representatives? If everyone can claim to represent a political community, then mankind will have returned to the jungle.
The occupy campaign has nothing to do with democracy, nor the rule of law, but rather it aims to overthrow the existing political system in Taiwan. After suffering these rounds of being trampled over, Taiwan's democracy is on the brink. Taiwan will probably never be well-known for its democratic achievements. Why can a society with the middle class as the majority not do well in realizing democracy? In fact, the gene necessary to democracy or the fundamental condition for realizing democracy is a homogeneous society.
But the DPP can prevail only by inciting ethnic antagonism. In competitive elections, the DPP created an ideological symbol to demonize the Kuomintang authority as an "alien regime". In this way, the DPP came into power by dividing Taiwan society. If we say the social movements initiated by the DPP in the beginning had promoted the democratization process in Taiwan, then what the DPP is doing today spells the end of Taiwan's democracy. In a non-homogenous and divisive society, even if there is democracy, it can only be bad democracy, which is difficult to function well.
Political consensus is the foundation underlying all efforts to build a society and to jointly abide by these principles is the premise for the Western-style pluralism and partisan politics.
The opinions expressed on this page do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
