 



Speaking before attending the Executive Council meeting on Tuesday, Chief Executive (CE) Leung Chun-ying reiterated that the SAR government is willing to make greater efforts to facilitate dialogue between lawmakers and the central government, in a bid to forge consensus on the CE election by universal suffrage in 2017. All relevant parties from across the political spectrum should note Leung's comments, along with recent remarks by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) Chairman Zhang Dejiang as a final wake-up call to bridge their differences. 
Not much time is left. Since Leung submitted a long-anticipated report on political reform to the NPCSC last week, a five-step process has been launched. This will eventually lead to the introduction of universal suffrage for the election of the city's leader. There is only five weeks to go before the NPCSC meets to discuss this crucial issue. 
Judging by views recently expressed by Zhang, Leung, and Chief Secretary Carrie Lam, who head the task force on the city's constitutional reform, the willingness and sincerity to develop democracy shown by the central and the SAR governments are beyond question. This also demolishes the opposition's accusation that Beijing is backtracking on its promise to grant universal suffrage in 2017. 
While Leung's government pledged that it would encourage more communication, it is now up to the opposition to show its sincerity by making a final effort to narrow the divide. They must do this without demanding any pre-conditions. Perhaps the first step the "pan-democrat" camp should take is to return to a legal framework during rational, pragmatic discussions on electoral reform. 
In fact, the central government's bottom line is already clear: Implementation of universal suffrage must be achieved in regard to the actual situation in HKSAR and in an orderly and gradual fashion. Equally important, it must be in line with the Basic Law. Besides, the central government has always emphasized one criterion also clearly stipulated in the Basic Law - the CE candidates must be patriotic. 
Obviously, the central government has attached great significance to Hong Kong's democratic development and well-being. This explains why the chairman of the nation's top legislature took time traveling all the way to Shenzhen to explain detailed guidelines on Hong Kong's constitutional reform. 
It is society's hope that the central government's sincerity on universal suffrage and the SAR government's willingness to serve as a conduit between Beijing and the opposition camp, should not be taken lightly. Instead, for the sake of Hong Kong's well-being, the opposition should accept this and move forward. 

(HK Edition 07/23/2014 page9)

