


      Many Western media, as well as local pro-opposition press, have attacked Beijing since Aug 31 when the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) approved the resolution on methods for selecting the Chief Executive (CE) by universal suffrage in 2017 and forming the Legislative Council (LegCo) in 2016 for the HKSAR.
      
        The opposition parties in Hong Kong found it particularly hard to accept that a potential CE candidate has to be a patriot as ruled by the NPCSC in its decision.
        
          An example of political bias, on the part of the Western media, can be seen in a Wall Street Journal (WSJ) editorial published on Sept 1. Its headline says, "Hong Kong's hopes crushed".
          
            It began by concluding that Hong Kong can only conduct "a sham election for the Chief Executive in 2017" because of the NPCSC decision. Its main arguments are summarized with the commonly used phrase - "international standards". It is safe to say all writings critical of the NPCSC decision cite "international standards" as their evidence for describing the central government as "anti-democracy". This argument is neither new nor original. The problem is these critics have never checked it against the facts.
            
              The focus of debate over the NPCSC decision is the mechanism by which candidates standing for election as CE in 2017 will be nominated.
              
                Critics are upset because this practically crushes opposition hopes of one of their members being nominated for election as CE by universal suffrage. This is because their loyalty to the nation as well as to Hong Kong is required. The WSJ argues that "love the nation" means "love the Communist Party" and is therefore "undemocratic". But the newspaper does not provide any solid evidence to support this argument.
                
                  The fact is the NPCSC decision requires a collective decision from the Nominating Committee (NC) when it selects CE election candidates. Its formation should be modeled upon the existing 1,200-member CE Election Committee. This effectively rules out public or political party nomination as demanded by the "pan-democrats".
                  
                    So the opposition camp now uses "international standards" as its "weapon" when challenging the NPCSC decision. But it has yet to prove the existence of such standards. Clearly all critics of the NPCSC decision agree that allowing opposition politicians to run for CE office is the only way to meet these "international standards". None of them has explained why a "genuine" democracy must exclude patriotism as a requirement for election candidates. Their biggest problem with patriotism is that they are convinced it means "loyalty to the central government". But, again, they have no proof of this.
                    
                      If there had been any international standards of democracy, the requirement of candidates being patriots is probably the only norm accepted by all jurisdictions.
                      
                        I am sure no government or individual with political ambition would ever challenge the common understanding that it is only natural for voters to expect election candidates to be patriotic. The "pan-democrats" in Hong Kong have no right to expect local voters not to demand patriotism from them. If they hate being regarded by the nation as patriots then they have no right to run for CE - because the HKSAR is an inalienable part of China, period.
                        
                          Several central government officials in charge of Hong Kong and Macao affairs have said the NPCSC decision was designed to prevent those determined to use Hong Kong as a base for subversive efforts from entering CE elections. Naturally, critics of this argument wasted no time in labeling such an election a "sham".
                          
                            Some "pan-democrats" have said Beijing's fears are unfounded because the majority of Hong Kong voters would not allow anyone with subversive motives to become CE. This is probably true. But it is hardly a good enough reason for the central government to agree to take the risk at the expense of Hong Kong - and the nation.
                            
                              The debate over "true democracy" has nothing to do with real democracy but rather how it can best serve certain parties' interests instead of the interests of Hong Kong.
                              
                                It also concerns the interests of 1.4 billion people on the mainland. There is no denying China is surrounded by hostile forces determined to undermine its peaceful rise. Hong Kong is an ideal platform for subversive efforts against Beijing. Fighting for democracy can be used as a cover for this.
                                
                                  Western media such as WSJ should explain why the US can keep its Electoral College system, which allows a presidential candidate to win election with fewer popular votes, but China (including HKSAR) is not allowed to pursue democratic reform in its own way. If they can't, then they are not qualified to criticize Beijing for failing to meet "international standards". These are China's domestic affairs. Interference by outside forces should not be tolerated.
                                  
                                    The NPCSC decision is meant to ensure no one can use Hong Kong as a platform against the central government for the benefit of foreign powers. By refusing to swear their opposition to such attempts, the "pan-democrats" have effectively shut themselves out of any CE election race. Now, they are threatening to boycott the second round of public consultation on constitutional reform. They are the ones preparing to derail the SAR government's plan for universal suffrage - not the central government.
                                    
                                      The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                                      
(HK Edition 09/16/2014 page1)

