 



The latest initiative from Hong Kong's self-styled democracy advocates to push ahead with their political agenda was an eye-opener not only to Hongkongers but to people around the world. It has also probably become the greatest stroke of irony in the history of democracy. 
In what they called a "democratic process", Occupy Central organizer Benny Tai Yiu-ting and his peers organized their so-called third and final "deliberation day" on Tuesday. They let some 2,500 participants choose three out of 15 election reform proposals to put forward for their online "referendum" next month. 
The proposal which comes out of this "referendum" represents a choice of people, who should be included in the proposed system of universal suffrage for the Chief Executive election in 2017, Tai and his allies claim. They have threatened to paralyze the Central district, Hong Kong's economic and financial heart, by sending 10,000 people to occupy the streets there if the government fails to accept their demands. 
The devil is in the details. Tai and his allies have hired a group of favored "experts" to filter out all proposals which fail to meet their demands. This was before allowing only those who have signed an agreement to support Occupy Central to vote on Tuesday. 
Unsurprisingly, this marvelous operation of double screening has allowed the Occupy advocates to ensure that only their favored proposals succeeded in Tuesday's poll. As expected, three of the most radical proposals that push for public nomination of CE hopefuls in 2017 topped Tuesday's ballot, while eight relatively moderate proposals failed to make the cut. 
What is surprising to Hong Kong people and perhaps the world, however, is that the Occupy organizers have been most vocal in advocating "genuine" universal suffrage in the city. They have been eloquently talking about international standards for democracy and elections. Yet they have shamelessly blocked out proposals which were not their own choices. 
This latest political stunt by self-styled democracy advocates has effectively revealed their true guise. It also reminds Hong Kong people of the proverb: "The loudest hollering tends to come from fake sellers." 
Obviously, what the Occupy advocates have been striving for is a mechanism that is likely to allow them to grab power in order to rule Hong Kong rather than to achieve democracy or genuine universal suffrage which they had previously been advocating. 

(HK Edition 05/08/2014 page9)

