
As Chinese reform continues, a great debate among intellectuals, scholars and political leaders has arisen as to which system is better: the Chinese or the American system. 
The fight against corruption is a particularly good point on which to compare China and the US for two reasons: Because it is so important now and because the extent of corruption is a measure of the justice of a particular system. 
Chinese colleagues often argue that the American system is full of unpunished corruption whereas in China those who are corrupt are now paying penalties for abuse of power and amassing great personal or family wealth through illegal means. In the wake of the US financial crisis, they say, no high bank officials have been brought to trial or punished in spite of the great damage they did. This is true. No CEO or other high official of an American megabank has been sent to prison. 
In today's China, by contrast, President Xi Jinping's anti-corruption campaign is bringing down a large number of corrupt officials, not only "flies" (lower level Party and state-owned enterprise officials) but many "tigers", including even a former member of the Standing Committee. Xi's political courage and determination is increasingly recognized in the West but, according to Western thinking, an institutional problem remains to be faced. 
In a Western view, the basic issue is not current results, important as they are, but the institutional framework for holding officials accountable on a permanent basis. Good institutions are fundamental to successful government over the long term. 
We are all human and powerful leaders, even if they are good people, are constantly faced with temptations to abuse their power. This is as true in China as in the US. Any system of government that depends on having a "good king" is permanently at risk. Well-constructed institutions of governance can survive even a bad leader. 
America's struggle with corruption after the financial crisis goes on. It's true that no high megabank officials have been put on trial, convicted and sent to prison. Nevertheless the banks-including the biggest "too big to fail" banks are being held accountable as banks. At last count 18 of the top banks have paid billions of dollars in fines for corrupt practices. True enough, the fines are modest compared with their revenues. Moreover, in the last several cases the megabanks have been obliged to plead guilty to criminal offenses rather than being allowed to escape by paying the money "without admitting or denying responsibility." 
What's crucial is that in the American system criminal and civil prosecutions of corrupt officials go on all the time. People - private sector as well as government officials - end up in prison all the time, some for very long terms. 
Of course corruption continues, which Americans understand not as some fatal flaw of capitalism or liberal democracy but an intrinsic aspect of human nature's natural tendency to use power for illegal, self-serving ends. Moreover, in the US many institutions, independent among themselves, share the task of vigilance: Congress, the court system, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Attorney General's office, and on and on. 
All informed Americans know that great changes are happening in China and in historical context the reforms are unprecedented. Americans who obsessively criticize China's failures often don't know much about China's history, let alone the history of the international Communist movement of which China was so long a part. 
American public and even Congressional opinion is often provincial rather than cosmopolitan. Ignorance abets ideology. 
The US system obviously needs serious repair. Our institutions of governance are venerable, but Congress today is dysfunctional; historical American bipartisanship is at a low point. The US is a young society with a mature political system. China is an ancient society with a new political system. The past is different and the future of each society is always a work in progress. 
The debate will go on as to which system is better. This is a good thing. Conclusions, to adapt Deng Xiaoping's advice, are a matter for future generations. 
The author is Eastman Professor of Political Science at Amherst College in MA. 

(China Daily USA 10/07/2014 page12)

