 



Recently certain financial and academic institutions have simultaneously revised their forecasts for Hong Kong's economic performance in 2014. For example, HSBC and the University of Hong Kong have lowered the city's projected economic growth this year from 3.7 to 2.9 percent and from 3.5 to 3.1 percent, respectively. The Hong Kong Trade Development Council (HKTDC) has adjusted its growth forecast for exports down 1 percentage point from the original 5.5 percent forecasts. This is understandable given the latest economic statistics. Hong Kong's economic future is likely to remain uncertain for some time. 
During the past few years, Hong Kong has enjoyed favorable circumstances enabling many industry sectors to thrive. The unemployment rate was low. This is the reason Hong Kong ranks third out of 211 cities in Mercer's Quality of Living Survey 2014. The prosperity of tourism-related sectors has led to virtually full employment and increased government revenues. This has made it possible for the government to improve the living standards of its citizens. 
The latest unemployment rate, however, increased slightly by 0.1 percentage point to 3.2 percent. Although the current levels are still at a record low, lately there have been signs of business contracting. This includes the soft import market, a weak Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI), fewer overseas visitors, a drop in retail sales over several months and so on. 
A friend of mine who works for a retail chain store recently expressed his concerns about the current economic situation. He said it was clearly demonstrated in retail data released in May - in which turnover for home appliances and photographic equipment decreased by 14 percent year-on-year. Mainland customers are a big market for this industry and when their purchasing habits change, the impact on the retail sector is significant. 
Judging from the current situation, industries such as retail, tourism and finance will all face uncertainty in the second half of the year. Prospects are not promising. More countries and regions are relaxing visa restrictions to mainlanders, providing them with more options for their travels. The "eight-point code" to cut bureaucracy and the anti-corruption campaign on the mainland have affected sales of branded products. The decline in the value of RMB this year has also affected consumption by mainland visitors. 
A decline in the retail sector could have devastating consequences for Hong Kong. It could result in a higher unemployment rate or reduced incomes for many people. And remember the old saying - it is always easier to go from frugality to extravagance than the other way around. The quality of life cannot be easily sacrificed once the majority of people have enjoyed it for an extended period. This will definitely put pressure on people's lives. It will therefore help foster discontent in society. 
The SAR government needs to be vigilant with regard to these developments as they are things which could lead to future societal instability. 
Hong Kong has long been a city famous for its simple tax system - which includes low tax rates and no value-added tax (VAT). An absence of foreign exchange controls gives the business environment additional freedom. Hong Kong also has excellent laws, high-quality standards and a highly skilled workforce. These are the SAR's great advantages. But in recent years Hong Kong's competitiveness has declined. The main reason is that our society has become increasingly politicized. Some Legislative Council (LegCo) members launch filibusters whenever they can to paralyze the legislature. Populist politicians try to provoke conflict between Hong Kong and the mainland. The government still has to deal with these difficult problems on top of its normal daily challenges. As a result government efficiency is affected and economic projects delayed. 
Fortunately the business community and the majority of the populous realize the harm caused by this disruptive behavior. They worry that once the "Occupy Central" movement goes ahead the economy may be affected. Consequently some have expressed their concern by supporting the anti-"Occupy Central" petition launched by the Alliance for Peace and Democracy. This has attracted over 930,000 signatures in just 10 days. 
The author is the vice-president of the Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 07/31/2014 page9)

