


      Recent events involving students in Taiwan and Hong Kong brought back memories of my experience as a young man in the exciting world of Beijing in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Many people of my generation had similar experiences, but I was lucky to have learned much about life outside the classroom. I am grateful for this - even though we are sometimes referred to as the "generation of lost youth".
      
        Before entering university in Beijing during the fall of 1978, at the older-than-usual age of 22, I spent four years in a rural district north of Beijing. I was doing farm work and teaching elementary classes at a village school. This allowed me to have a perspective quite different from my much younger peers who went straight from high school to college.
        
          For example, I observed, with amusement, some campaigns for student council president. I had previously watched two village chief elections (as an urban high school graduate ineligible to vote because I was not a villager) during the era of the people's commune. Later, I learned both of these could be viewed from a Western perspective as "democratic reforms with Chinese characteristics", although they were hardly new in China at grassroots level.
          
            The main difference between urban campus and rural village elections was the rationale behind them. The election for a student president was regarded as a kind of test of political intuition to see whether someone had the right leadership qualities. The village chief election had been a regular event for decades by the time I saw it. It was as practical as any election could be.
            
              Student presidential elections were not exactly new on mainland campuses, either. The one I witnessed in 1978 was quite different from those I vaguely remembered as a child before the "cultural revolution" (1966-76) began. The election I saw in my freshman year had an uncanny resemblance to those held every year on US campuses - but with the campaigns focused on very different issues. This reflected campus as well as national conditions. It was more fun than serious politics. Rural grassroots elections have always been about finding the right candidate. After all, the villagers know one another so well that surprises are hard to produce under such conditions.
              
                During previous village chief elections there was no campaigning in the familiar sense of the word. Instead there were plenty of "talks" supported by "the men (father and grandfather) of the house" around the family dinner table. The college elections were quite a fanfare even though the results had little, if any, "official impact" on the careers of those who won them. It was exciting enough for some students to want to get their names "out there" among peers who were practically strangers outside their departments. The common factor was "one person, one vote".
                
                  It is interesting to note that there have been internal elections for the leadership of local branches of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Communist Youth League of China (CYLC). There have also been popular elections for local deputies of the National People's Congress (NPC) and the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC). These are held regularly at the same time as grassroots elections.
                  
                    As a registered voter without any political affiliation I performed my civic duties in all the relevant elections except the village chief one. These elections have always followed the same long-established national formats.
                    
                      Unthinkable as it may seem to Western democracies, grassroots level elections in China served the same purpose as elections in Western countries. However, the Western media often want to convey the opposite impression.
                      
                        The problem is Western societies, and particularly the US, are so indoctrinated about communism. So they generally just accept whatever the press says about elections in China. This is despite the fact that the basic requirements for democratic elections in China are the same as in most other countries.
                        
                          Another factor the West regards as crucial is fair competition in multi-party politics. This is because it believes there are no meaningful checks and balances without it. That is true to a certain extent. However, it is not readily admitted in Western political teachings that this kind of competition takes place with the same ideological mindset among most, if not all, contenders - particularly in the US. That means there is no real diversity or meaningful choice in US elections for the voters - who only get to pick between "conservative/pro-business" and "progressive/pro-welfare" attitudes. Not many know or care about the fact that both are totally devoted to safeguarding the well-being of capitalism - or rather "institutionalized inequality".
                          
                            Are elections in China and the US really as different as "heaven and earth" as some people in Hong Kong say? To be frank, I'm not so sure.
                            
                              The author is a current affairs commentator.
                              
(HK Edition 04/28/2014 page9)

