



Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying on Sunday once again resolutely ruled out the re-launching of the five-step political process for Hong Kong 2017 universal suffrage. 
The demand for restarting the political reform process indicates that those student protesters and other occupiers have an appalling lack of understanding of the Basic Law, the National People's Congress Standing Committee's (NPCSC) Aug 31 decision and the whole reform process. They have no idea that the development of democracy in Hong Kong must conform with the scope prescribed by the central government. 
The "restarting" issue raised by some radicals is ridiculous and absurd, because it is tantamount to rejecting all the hard work the central and the SAR governments have done so far, and overturning the framework set out by the nation's top legislature. 
The implementation of universal suffrage is the biggest political issue since the handover. It is not only about electoral arrangements, but also closely related to Hong Kong's long-term prosperity and stability as well as the nation's security and sovereignty. 
Therefore, the process must strictly comply with the Basic Law and the NPCSC's decision. The principles should never be bandied about, and the SAR government can ill-afford to bow to the radicals' political extortions. 
The "Occupy Central" movement has so far failed to achieve anything positive, other than wreaking havoc on the city. Hong Kong people have gained a better understanding of the right path for democratic development. Even Benny Tai, the "Occupy" initiator, ran an article in the The New York Times recently calling on protesters to retreat. He described the movement as having deviated from "love and peace" and has become a "high-risk, low-return business". 
The police is expected to launch an all-out effort to clear the streets occupied by the protesters soon. Instead of continuing their confrontational tactics, the protesters should be rational and realistic, seeking to positively participate in the second round of public consultation on the electoral reform. 
The occupiers are now making a last-ditch effort to glorify themselves and legitimize their illegal activities. But their attempts will not succeed. The "Occupy" has taxed the tolerance and patience of the majority of Hong Kong people to the limit, and any political stunt, including hunger strike, would not help the "Occupy" movement. 

(HK Edition 12/08/2014 page9)

