


      Chris Patten, the last governor of Hong Kong recently showed that he really enjoys making trouble.
      
        The UK's House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee held a hearing last week as part of its review of the implementation of the Sino-British Joint Declaration in Hong Kong. The intention of the review is clearly to interfere in China's domestic affairs. Indeed, it already has some UK lawmakers worried. But Patten could not be happier as he has yet another opportunity to show his true colors.
        
          In his testimony, Patten threw all the mud he could at the central and Hong Kong governments as well as Chief Executive (CE) Leung Chun-ying. He also raved on about the illegal "Occupy Central" movement. Patten made inflammatory accusations over Hong Kong's constitutional development. This was in an attempt to further complicate the situation and render a peaceful solution more difficult.
          
            Patten made it sound like Hong Kong's constitutional development is none of the central government's business! He inferred that the SAR government and CE have the power to ignore the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) and resolve the current impasse as they wish. He said "Occupy" lingered on because the SAR government, and Leung in particular, have inadequate political skills to convince the "occupiers" to return home. He also claimed the Hong Kong Police Force failed to resolve the situation because officers resorted to force - batons and pepper spray instead of political channels.
            
              Every legend has its hero and Patten knows exactly who this is when he is telling the story! While painting Beijing as a "villain" and the SAR government as its stooge, he exceeded his usual condescending pomposity. The last governor exhibited egotism and hypocrisy. In addition to confessing he was "deeply impressed" by the spirit of the "occupiers", Patten also justified their unlawful behavior. He said young people felt "Hong Kong's future had been stolen" from them and it was this that triggered the protests. Then, Patten showed his powers of flattery by describing student "occupiers" in Hong Kong as an example of "mature democratic society". But Patten did not say how the protesters were respecting other people's rights - nor explain why "real universal suffrage" is necessary.
              
                It is now common knowledge that the illegal blockades of important roads in Hong Kong have adversely affected many local residents' lives and business operations. Such unlawful behavior has escalated into violent resistance toward police and defiance of court injunctions. Is this Patten's definition of a "mature democratic society"? If the answer is "yes", one can but wonder how he can live with the presence of police in his own country. Patten knows full well that police in Western democracies would have responded no differently from police in Hong Kong had they faced a similar situation.
                
                  All this naturally makes perfect sense if Patten's real motive for such irresponsible claims is to stir up animosity between the Hong Kong public and the police. As a former colonial governor, Patten knows police officers have to do their jobs. Does he genuinely believe the police can show they are apolitical by giving the "occupiers" carte blanche?
                  
                    Furthermore there is little more the CE and principal officials can do after offering student leaders some options during their initial talks. Patten leaves us with the impression he would have handled the situation far better.
                    
                      Patten's introduction of limited democracy to Hong Kong in the early 1990s, in violation of the Sino-British Joint Declaration, helped sow the seeds for many of the SAR's current problems. This includes all the problems the "pan-democrats" have given successive SAR governments over the past 17 years and the ongoing "umbrella movement". Patten should show greater humility and assume responsibility for disrupting Hong Kong society with his rash political reforms. They helped trigger panic in the financial markets, allowing international speculators to hurt Hong Kong. This also left several infrastructure development projects unfinished and tens of billions of dollars over budget. This all occurred soon after Patten returned home at the end of his term as Hong Kong's last governor.
                      
                        Patten accused the Chinese government of blocking Hong Kong's democratic development. He insisted this was why Hong Kong's youth felt their future had been stolen. Does he also mean this was why they decided to cause so much damage (and perhaps do more in future)? It should be noted that Patten made these accusations against the Chinese government with little hard evidence to back up his claims.
                        
                          Someone more qualified than Patten has refuted his wild claims. Lord Powell of Bayswater, former private secretary of Margaret Thatcher and a member of the House of Lords, said in an interview with the BBC last month, "Hong Kong has extensive autonomy - far greater than we believed actually could be achieved when the Hong Kong joint declaration with China was negotiated. They have had far better conditions - including political conditions - than any other city in China. But the bottom-line is they are a city in China." Lord Powell also described protester demands and attempts to achieve them as "unrealistic".
                          
                            The author is a veteran journalist based in Hong Kong.
                            
(HK Edition 11/10/2014 page10)

