



The Alliance for Peace and Democracy (APD) announced at a press conference on Thursday that it has set up a platform for victims of "Occupy Central" to seek professional advice on legal matters such as compensation for financial losses. The illegal "Occupy" movement has inflicted heavy losses on many small businesses in the consumer services sector by blocking traffic - not just in Central but in Causeway Bay and Mong Kok - for almost three weeks now. 
Such abusive acts have also put some construction and renovation works on hold, forcing contractors to lay off workers or put them on unpaid leave. Indeed, the APD has received 114 separate complaints by individual victims of "Occupy" as of Thursday. This is in addition to those filed by entities representing more than 1,000 affected employees in tourism and others involved in the taxi and mini-bus sector. The number is growing by the hour. 
The APD has invited several legal experts to provide professional advice to "Occupy" victims. These are fine and justifiable moves. They are in stark contrast to the illegal and irrational behavior by people involved in the "Occupy" campaign. 
The team of legal counsels will analyze each case and recommend an appropriate course of action for victims to pursue in court - such as taking out restraining orders, claiming compensation for financial damages and undertaking litigation. If a victim finds it necessary to publicize his or her case, the APD will do its best to fulfill these wishes with media interviews or press conferences. This is completely appropriate considering the non-stop bombardment by some biased media organizations since Aug 31. They have acted as cheerleaders for the law-breaking fest which is "Occupy". 
The rule of law in Hong Kong is in a very real and present danger. It will crumble if this ongoing abuse by "Occupy" of the individual rights and freedoms of residents does not end soon. The masterminds of this illegal movement know the best way to paralyze, not just a few business districts, but all of Hong Kong is to destroy its rule of law. That is why they concocted the notion that anyone can break the law by using "true democracy" or "real universal suffrage" as an excuse and then brainwash some young people with it. 
Those who sincerely wish for Hong Kong to enjoy full democracy without losing its stability and prosperity should understand that "Occupy" leaders will never let them see that day. This is because the illegal campaign is designed to ruin this opportunity by destroying the foundations which safeguard any modern society - the rule of law. 
That is exactly what happened in the countries where "color revolutions" took place in recent years and is happening here right now. We must stop the perilous plot in our city by any means necessary. 

(HK Edition 10/17/2014 page10)

