 



As Hong Kong experiences an unusually hot summer, the anti-"Occupy Central" campaign is also heating up. 
The month-long petition organized by the Alliance for Peace and Democracy has passed its halfway point. Over a million people have put their signatures to the anti-"Occupy" petition, which also favors the implementation of universal suffrage according to the Basic Law for the 2017 Chief Executive (CE) election. 
Five leading business chambers held a joint press conference on July 28. They were all declaring their opposition to the illegal "Occupy Central" campaign, warning that the movement, which mistakenly claims to be a form of "civil disobedience", will damage the city's economy. They predict it will have a similar negative impact to that which the recent political protests in Bangkok have had on Thailand's economy. 
On July 29, the alliance announced that the month-long petition, which closes on Aug 17, will be followed by a march from Victoria Park to Chater Garden, to mobilize Hong Kong residents against "Occupy Central". The organizers estimate that 50,000 to 60,000 people will participate. 
Many have already expressed their opposition to it. On the morning of July 29, about 60 minibuses parked in Fa Yuen Street in Mong Kok displaying anti-"Occupy" signs. The Public Light Bus General Association has also decided to display anti-"Occupy" posters on its 1,000-strong red minibus fleet. 
On July 29, Chief Secretary Carrie Lam met the three "Occupy" leaders - Benny Tai Yiu-ting, Chan Kin-man and Chu Yiu-ming. She told them firmly that their political agenda "can never be achieved" through "civil disobedience". This was the first time an official in charge of constitutional reform has said this to the "Occupy" initiators. 
It is also the first time the SAR government has emphatically expressed its objections to the illegal campaign. 
Moreover, Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying and other principal officials have signed, or promised to sign, the petition against "Occupy". The CE and his team need to show more decisive support for the anti-"Occupy" movement. 
The government must remain resolute and rational in dealing with the current political situation in Hong Kong. Carrie Lam, who heads the Task Force on Constitutional Development (TFCD), has repeatedly stressed that the government is open-minded about constitutional reform and that there is scope for further adaptation of the electoral system in future. 
The government should realize that Hongkongers are prepared to accept some form of universal suffrage in order to persuade the opposition camp to compromise. The government should also persuade the opposition to accept a form of universal suffrage in the 2017 CE election on condition that a more developed democratic mechanism will be adopted later. 
However, given the growing political polarization of society, the opposition camp won't accept compromise. Instead they will go ahead with "Occupy Central". This is something of a gamble. All the government will be able to do, once the campaign has been launched, is limit the harm it will do to Hong Kong's reputation as a financial and commercial hub. 
It should also try to use its resources to minimize the damage the campaign could potentially cause to those living and working in Central. 
The government should also mobilize companies, institutions and citizens in Central to help by opposing "Occupy". On July 29 a new group formed by 10 lawyers suggested small and medium-sized businesses at risk of being adversely affected by the activities of "Occupy" might consider taking legal action against its organizers. 
The police have already established a plan, code-named "Solar Peak", to counter "Occupy". This includes recruiting retired police officers to handle the logistics for police counter measures. Officers will be permitted to publish information about these measures to ensure the public are informed. This will help deter the "Occupiers" and their supporters from more aggressive tactics. It will also encourage Hong Kong residents to provide moral support. 
The "Occupy" campaign tries to mask its intentions behind terms like "civil disobedience", "true democracy" or "genuine universal suffrage". But it can never hide the illegal nature, or negative intention of its activities. The SAR government, the patriotic camp and Hong Kong residents must unite to prevent it from wreaking havoc. If they don't the opposition camp may never accept having the CE election by universal suffrage according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee. 
By pledging allegiance to an illegal movement the "pan-democrats" have potentially declared themselves opponents of the rule of law. This means they have lost the right to negotiate and make deals on the subject of constitutional reform. 
The only sure way Hong Kong can achieve universal suffrage within the established constitutional framework is to stop "Occupy" before it does this city considerable harm. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 08/06/2014 page9)

