


      The National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) exercised its supreme authority on Sunday to endorse the framework for the 2017 Hong Kong Chief Executive (CE) election following a week-long deliberation.
      
        According to the decision endorsed unanimously by all 170 members of the NPCSC - the country's top legislature, two or three CE hopefuls could stand for public ballot after securing support of more than half of the members of a 1,200-strong Nominating Committee (NC), which ensure that the nominations truly reflect the collective will. The composition and size of the NC - the only authority qualified to propose candidates for the 2017 CE election - will remain exactly the same as that of the existing Election Committee.
        
          The NPCSC's ruling is encouraging news, because it will help contribute to greater prosperity and the territory's long-term stability. It will also steer Hong Kong away from endless political bickering. The city has been locked in squabbles over political reform for too long. It is time for all sectors across the political spectrum to overcome their differences over universal suffrage. They should embrace a much-needed "grand reconciliation" for the sake of the well-being of Hong Kong. It is time our citizens shifted the focus back to stimulating the city's economy and to livelihood issues.
          
            A glimpse of key points outlined by the NPCSC on Sunday over Hong Kong's forthcoming universal suffrage strikes a fine balance between Hong Kong people's aspirations for "one person, one vote" and the central government's genuine concerns over national security, sovereignty and development interest. In light of the actual circumstances in the special administrative region at this historic time, the NPCSC resolution should be viewed as the "best arrangement for Hong Kong", rather than "something interim that can be pocketed for the time being".
            
              The NPCSC's approval of the implementation of universal suffrage in Hong Kong in 2017 speaks volumes about Beijing's commitment and sincerity. The central government could insist on making its current Hong Kong policy "remain unchanged for 50 years" and put the thorny issues of political reform on the shelf, but it chose to shoulder its constitutional responsibilities. It only took 20 years from the handover for Hong Kong to attain universal suffrage. This is quite a remarkable achievement. In striking contrast, under British rule Hong Kong stood still on its road towards democracy for 150 years. Having said that, Western-style democracy can't be hastily, prematurely introduced, or Hong Kong would risk being torn apart by endless political bickering. This explains why the central government constantly emphasizes the importance of advancing democracy in a gradual and orderly fashion.
              
                While the Hong Kong public applauds the NPCSC's decision, we should stay alert against certain radicals who repeatedly threaten to paralyze the city's financial heart. "Occupy Central" is now gaining momentum as its organizers held a rally on Sunday night at Tamar Park to outline their plans. But they did not hold candid dialogue with all the stakeholders in the second round of public consultation over the electoral arrangements within the NPCSC's newly announced framework. And these unruly activists have once again chosen to resort to confrontational tactics. Some key members from the opposition camp vowed to "stage wave after wave of struggle that at its climax will be full-scale demonstration and all-out blockade in Central". This sort of political extortion stands no chance of swaying Beijing.
                
                  Aggressive protests are very likely to end in bloodshed if the people behind them refuse to back down. Such cases were already seen in countries like Libya and Ukraine: Some agitators persuaded citizens to participate in so-called civil disobedience with a hidden agenda. When the governments attempted to maintain order, the agitators took the moral high ground and condemned their governments or even overthrew them. Furthermore, elections in countries like Thailand, where the outcome of votes was not respected, should remind Hong Kong that without the rule of law, people's political rights could not be protected.
                  
                    With considerable political courage and extraordinary wisdom, and the support of the vast majority of Hong Kong people, the central and SAR governments will be more than able to deal with looming "Occupy Central" and even worse political scenarios.
                    
                      Now, with the NPCSC's green light, 5 million eligible voters in Hong Kong are set to embrace universal suffrage. But to make Hong Kong people's biggest democratic dream come true, at least two-thirds of Legislative Councilors need to vote in favor of the electoral reform plan to be tabled by the SAR government. Opposition lawmakers should move with the times, and not dash the public's aspirations for democracy.
                      
                        The author is a senior editor of China Daily Hong Kong Edition. Contact the writer at boblee@chinadailyhk.com
                        
(HK Edition 09/01/2014 page9)

