


      2014 marks the 30th anniversary of the Sino-British Joint Declaration, which set out arrangements for the transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong to China under the "One Country, Two Systems" framework. Since the handover in 1997, Hong Kong has continued to prosper, and its success is well regarded by the international community.
      
        However, encouraged by politicians including Anson Chan, Martin Lee, Chris Patten and Nick Clegg, the British parliament is now launching an inquiry into the political situation in Hong Kong. It will examine implementation of the Joint Declaration over the past 30 years, and what role it should play in Hong Kong's political and social development. Public submissions are now being accepted by The House of Common's Foreign Affairs Committee. Its findings are to be released in early 2015.
        
          Hong Kong has been a local administrative region of China since 1997. This means Hong Kong affairs fall entirely within China's State jurisdiction. So on what grounds has the United Kingdom got to poke its nose into these affairs? As a co-signatory, the UK said it retained an enduring commitment to Hong Kong following the transfer of sovereignty.
          
            Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg is among a handful of politicians who play a vanguard role. After meeting Anson Chan and Martin Lee, he told the pair he was aware of the anxiety aroused in Hong Kong by the tone and content of Beijing's white paper. Clegg vowed to honor Britain's 1984 pledge to "mobilize the international community and pursue every legal and other avenue available" should China breach the agreement promised for Hong Kong. As the leader of the Liberal Democrats, Clegg went on to criticize his Conservative Party coalition partners, including Prime Minister David Cameron, for failing to back the former colony.
            
              Chris Patten, the last governor of Hong Kong, is another British politician who delights in meddling in China's internal affairs. In an interview with the Financial Times recently, Patten said he felt "compelled to speak out" because of the white paper which said Hong Kong judges should be "patriotic". He also said London would never have signed the Sino-British Joint Declaration if the language used then had been the same as the language now being used by Beijing.
              
                But the inconvenient truth London prefers to ignore is universal suffrage in Hong Kong was never mentioned in the Joint Declaration. The notion of universal suffrage was first introduced in the Basic Law drafted by Beijing. Therefore, for Clegg, Patten and others, to accuse Beijing of blocking universal suffrage is absurd and laughable.
                
                  British-style hypocrisy can be unmasked by a tiny but telling example cited by a Huffington Post commentary: The late John Walden, a veteran public servant who had been serving the colonial government for three decades, said in a speech in 1985: "If I personally find it difficult to believe in the sincerity of this sudden and unexpected official enthusiasm for democratic politics it is because throughout the 30 years I was an official myself, from 1951 to 1981, 'democracy' was a dirty word. Officials were convinced that the introduction of democratic politics into Hong Kong would be the quickest and surest way to ruin Hong Kong's economy and create social and political instability."
                  
                    This bit of history reminds us that London didn't bother with democracy in Hong Kong until the very final years of colonial rule. Perhaps the only reasonable explanation for Britain's final push for democracy was to leave a political "time bomb" ticking which would have destructive consequences in the future.
                    
                      Democracy is itself a constant subject of controversy. It is dubbed as the best possible choice of political systems for mankind, yet it was labeled "the worst form of government" by Winston Churchill. John Adams, a founding father of the United States, once said, "Remember, democracy never lasts long. It soon wastes, exhausts, and murders itself. There never was a democracy yet that did not commit suicide". Aung San Suu Kyi - one of the staunchest fighters for democracy in the world, said, "Sometimes I think that a parody of democracy could be more dangerous than a blatant dictatorship, because that gives people an opportunity to avoid doing anything about it".
                      
                        The central government is well-aware of democracy's positive and negative nature. This explains while fulfilling Hong Kong people's aspirations for universal suffrage, the Basic Law lays out a raft of criteria: to look into the "actual situation", and to proceed in a gradual and orderly fashion.
                        
                          If Britain thinks it could and should take a more aggressive role in monitoring the "One Country, Two Systems" policy in the name of democracy, it has obviously got things wrong. The UK should, therefore, immediately stop interfering in Hong Kong affairs. Instead, it should respect China's position and encourage the positive development of Sino-UK relations through sensible actions.
                          
                            The author is a senior editor of China Daily Hong Kong Edition. boblee@chinadailyhk.com
                            
(HK Edition 08/04/2014 page9)

