



As "Occupy Central" campaign is unfolding right in front of us, the scales and tactics of this illegal campaign still caught many off guard. The confrontation marks a turning point in the city's quest for democracy. While Beijing reaffirmed its position of firmly supporting the Hong Kong SAR government and opposing all kinds of illegal acts that sabotage law and security, the White House and Downing Street have also simultaneously voiced their concerns by "monitoring events in Hong Kong". 
Let us reveal an inconvenient truth London prefers to ignore - universal suffrage for Hong Kong was never mentioned in the Sino-British Joint Declaration. The notion of universal suffrage was first introduced in the Basic Law drafted by Beijing. 
In fact, the British colonial government considered "democracy" a dirty word. According to John Walden, a veteran public servant in Hong Kong for three decades, the British were convinced that "the introduction of democratic politics into Hong Kong would be the quickest and surest way to ruin Hong Kong's economy and create social and political instability". 
It is true that the HKSAR is an open, pluralistic and diversified metropolis where Chinese and Western cultures converge. But this doesn't mean foreign forces can brazenly interfere with China's internal affairs. 
Those bossy Western politicians and media should fully realize that, as a special administrative region of China, Hong Kong issues fall totally within China's domestic affairs. Relevant countries should be prudent in their words and deeds, and stay away from instigating the illegal acts such as "Occupy Central". 
Concern about meddling from outside forces in Hong Kong's constitutional affairs is not being paranoid - it is actually happening. There have been numerous examples of such acts in Hong Kong's history. As a British colony for more than 150 years, Hong Kong was given the nickname "Casablanca of the East" long before Hong Kong's handover in 1997. It is still home to many spies working for a range of foreign interests. 
As protesters converged and scattered at various parts not only in Central, but also Causeway Bay, Admiralty and Mong Kok, and virtually no one is able to predict what will come next. 
Hong Kong is now at a critical juncture of order and chaos with forthcoming universal suffrage at stake. It is in the best interest of Hong Kong society if foreign forces would only mind their own business, and the "Occupy" can fizzle out sooner rather than later. 

(HK Edition 10/01/2014 page7)

