 
The latest example of the importance Beijing attaches to implementing universal suffrage in Hong Kong came on July 19, only three days after the reports released by Chief Executive (CE) Leung Chun-ying and the Task Force on Constitutional Development (TFCD). 
National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) Chairman Zhang Dejiang met Leung and members of the TFCD in Shenzhen to exchange views on these reports. 
After he returned to Hong Kong, Leung said Zhang had reiterated that the central government wanted Hong Kong to achieve "one person, one vote" in the 2017 CE election, but this must follow the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC. 
In Shenzhen Zhang talked to representatives of political groups and business organizations from the "Love Nation and Love Hong Kong" camp. The patriotic camp is now being mobilized. On July 19, the Alliance for Protecting Universal Suffrage and Against Occupy Central launched a one-month "Anti-Occupy Central Signature Campaign". Hundreds of thousands of Hongkongers have signed the petition for a "peaceful and non-violent" CE election by universal suffrage. Both the SAR government and the central government in Beijing are well aware of the potential political battle looming between pro-establishment and opposition camps. 



Hong Kong is at a critical stage in its constitutional development. This will consolidate the city as an inalienable part of China rather than as an independent political entity. The CE election by the process of "one person, one vote" must be carried out in a manner befitting the constitutional status of the SAR. This means the illegal "Occupy Central" campaign must be defused. 
The opposition repeatedly demands that universal suffrage conform to so-called international norms. However even in the West various forms of democracy have long been the subject of debate. Certain Western scholars have spoken highly of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy which China created for Hong Kong and other regions. The Financial Times, a leading newspaper in the West, published two opinion pieces on July 18. One was "Hong Kong's journey to democracy will be led by China" by Paul Tong, life fellow at St. John's College of the University of Hong Kong. The other was "Beijing is just reiterating China's stance on Hong Kong" by Tim Summers. Summers is a senior consulting fellow of the Asia Program at Chatham House and is currently resident in Hong Kong. 
Paul Tong criticized the newspaper's July 17 editorial entitled "Britain must speak out on Hong Kong". He argued that this suggestion was misconceived. He noted that British Prime Minister David Cameron declined to meet with "pro-democracy activists" from Hong Kong. Tong also stressed that "China always follows the Basic Law" without "evidence of breach or pending breach." Tong said, "one thing is clear: China wants universal suffrage to take place in 2017 - albeit on its own terms. But the fact that the people can exercise a choice by one man one vote is a great step forward towards the ultimate goal." 
To comprehensively and accurately implement the Basic Law, it is necessary to understand it. Tim Summers said that the newspaper's interview with Hong Kong's last governor Chris Patten and other articles and letters all showed a lack understanding of the central government's white paper on "One Country, Two Systems". In fact, the white paper has reiterated Beijing's longstanding policy position. This was not an attempt to redefine its relationship with Hong Kong. 
In the coming months, the SAR government should help Hongkongers understand that Beijing is committed to implementing universal suffrage in the HKSAR. But this can be achieved only by maintaining the city's constitutional status. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 07/23/2014 page9)

