
When masked protesters stormed the Legislative Council (LegCo) on Nov 19, the "pan-democrats", "Occupy Central" initiators, Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) and Scholarism all denied any knowledge of these violent actions. 
If the "pan-democrat" politicians had sincerely wanted to distance themselves from the violence, they should have initiated a withdrawal from "occupied" sites in Mong Kok. This should have been done before the clearance operation was completed. 
This would have been a good opportunity to end the illegal movement without it doing further damage. They should have instructed the protesters to return home, abandon their blockades and restore the roads to the public. They should have also advised the occupiers to accept responsibility for their illegal actions. Only by doing this can politicians convince the public they are against violence. 
However, instead of seizing this opportunity, both the HKFS and Scholarism pursued their support for the "Occupy" campaign. Late last month, leaders of both organizations were arrested for obstructing the clearance of protest sites. On Nov 29 night, they made a violent attempt to seize Central Government Offices (CGO) in Admiralty. Fierce clashes on Lung Wo Road resulted. Police managed to repel the attackers early on Nov 30, but the latter tried again the same evening and failed. The authorities finally restored traffic to Lung Wo Road at 7 am on Dec 1. 
Both sides reported injuries from violent clashes between police and protestors, who were apparently well prepared for aggressive tactics. 



The incident hindered normal morning operations of the CGO. Afterwards the HKFS and Scholarism even boasted of some success and claimed responsibility for the violent attack. 
It is ludicrous to claim the paralysis of the CGO was a sign of success. Although they took responsibility for the event, they wasted much time and money at the expense of Hong Kong people. This loss cannot be compensated for with a few apologies. Furthermore, Hong Kong's economic development and the future of those young people who were arrested will be seriously affected. No one can ever make up for this. 
The biggest irony is that before the operation even started, both student organizations repeated on television that their actions would be non-violent. 
They also emphasized they would not initiate clashes with police. Later, some masked, helmeted protesters armed with umbrellas appeared. Some were equipped with pepper, lime powder, wooden shields with nails, fire extinguishers and metal bars. These people had even prepared trip wires for police. Neither organization made any attempt to dissuade or warn anyone when violent, pre-planned attacks on police began. 
Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying said most of the protesters who aggressively attacked police officers outside CGO had been involved in the Mong Kok clashes. 
It is difficult to ascertain who was manipulating the event, but it was not only the above-mentioned organizations. Afterwards, HKFS and Scholarism representatives didn't realize how angry ordinary people were about the violence triggered by the movement until their faithful "pan-democrat" supporters condemned them. 
Facing unpopular sentiment, they had no choice but to admit to failure. They apologized to injured and arrested protesters, without showing any remorse to the public they had upset or to the police officers they had injured. 
Since the start of "Occupy", more than 500 people have been injured. There have been too many casualties. The public wishes to see peace return to Hong Kong. If everyone wants democracy, there should be a peaceful search to find a feasible plan for Hong Kong's future. It must always respect the interests of everyone in this city. 
The author is vice-president of the Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 12/08/2014 page9)

