


Constructive spirit prevailed through session marked by momentous issues 
Deepening reform was the main focus for China's political advisers at the annual session of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference's 12th National Committee, China's top political advisory body, which concluded on Wednesday in Beijing. 
During the closing session attended by President Xi Jinping and other State leaders, CPPCC Chairman Yu Zhengsheng summed up: "As the reform enters a difficult stage and confronts resistance from vested interest groups, the CPPCC must make good use of intellectual and talent resources and carry on deep research on some key issues to foster reforms." 
Yu encouraged sharp but not extreme criticism to create a democratic atmosphere from the first day of the session on March 3. 
The session, which proved productive and efficient, was carried out in such an atmosphere. 
By March 7, the session had received 5,875 proposals from 1,969 members of the CPPCC National Committee out of its 2,229 members. And 4,982 proposals are registered officially in 14 fields. 
Most of the registered proposals address thorny issues on deepening reforms, people's livelihoods and the treatment of environmental pollution. 
Among the 1,018 registered proposals on deepening reform, 287 touch administrative system reform, calling for streamlining of the governance system and implementing a strict accountability system while 380 concern financial and tax reform and 147 deal with the promotion of an economy of diverse ownerships. 
Hundreds of proposals are registered in the field of anti-corruption, environmental pollution, urbanization, the modernization of agriculture and enhancing openness. 
All of the registered proposals will soon be handed to the government departments concerned. Those proposing them will receive written feedback about their suggestions from the government. 
"The proposals' close pertinence to the reform plan made by the Communist Party of China's 18th Central Committee, and their insightfulness, show the members' strong sense of responsibility for the nation," said Yu. 
"In the past 65 years, CPPCC has walked the ups and downs with the Chinese people. The renewal of China and the realization of the Chinese Dream entail our hard work to fulfill our responsibilities required by the times." 
During the session, the CPPCC also organized a face-to-face meeting between about 20 of its advisers with economic experts and nine vice-ministers on how to address and solve overcapacity in some Chinese industries. The vice-ministers affirmed the high value of the suggestions. 
The CPPCC National Committee members also listened to the work report of the central government delivered by Premier Li Keqiang. 
"The CPPCC will seek new development from innovation, fulfill its duties to the Party and government's work, and better serve the people's needs this year," said the session's statement. 
The politburo standing members of the CPC Central Committee - Xi, Li, Zhang Dejiang, Liu Yunshan, Wang Qishan and Zhang Gaoli - attended different panel discussions of the CPPCC during the session. 
Party chief Xi presented the panel discussion of ethnic minority members of CPPCC, and he emphasized that a system of ethnic minority autonomy must be implemented and improved to foster the unity of all ethnic groups as well as common prosperity and development. 
The CPPCC responded that it will make its unique contribution for not only the national unity of the areas in which ethnic minorities live but also for the Chinese mainland's harmonious relations with Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan and overseas Chinese. 
Consultative democracy is a unique form and special advantage of socialist democratic politics in China. The CPPCC is a major channel in which to put principle into practice in China since its establishment 65 years ago, as adviser and supervisor for the government. 
liyang@chinadaily.com.cn 






 
CPPCC members pose for a photo in front of the Great Hall of the People in Beijing after their closing meeting on Wednesday. Wang Jing / China Daily
(China Daily USA 03/13/2014 page5)
