 
Radical opposition members of the Legislative Council (LegCo) immediately vowed to block Financial Secretary John Tsang's annual Fiscal Budget Plan after it was presented to lawmakers last month. Some lost no time telling the press they were ready for the filibustering campaign. 
This came as no surprise because they have done it several times in recent years and disgusted the public. This year one of their preconditions for supporting the budget was that the government must give all permanent residents cash handouts - as it did before. But the government has already explained why it decided to stop the "candies for all" practice. The public largely agree the money could be put to better use. Apparently radical opposition lawmakers do not agree. 
They seem convinced that by demanding more cash handouts for Hong Kong residents they can block the budget funding bill, by call for hundreds, if not thousands, of ridiculous changes. This will no doubt drag on for weeks so the bill cannot be approved before the summer recess. As a result voting on important bills will have to wait. All such delays mean considerable taxpayers' money will be wasted while the farce continues. Only LegCo members who sponsor the filibuster bills stand to profit from them. They do this in the form of locked-in votes for their re-election. 



The filibustering culture is nothing new in Western parliamentary democracy. It has been around in countries like Britain and the United States for almost as long as their legislatures have existed. Because of the self-serving nature of such moves, filibusters have been called many things by the public - most notably abuse of power and irresponsible. They are, therefore, anti-democratic. 
This is because they take advantage of the democratic system to serve the personal interests of their sponsors at the expense of the public. This is precisely what democracy is supposed to curtail - if not eliminate. It developed from the opportunistic nature of Western parliamentary politics and has absolutely no regard for true democratic principles. Some are inclined to accept it as part of the price paid for having "true democracy" without knowing why it is necessary. 
The operations of LegCo are similar to those of a typical Western parliamentary system. This includes flawed procedures that allow ill-motivated lawmakers to abuse their power for personal gain. This is another reason why some people were not surprised when the opposition camp began mimicking political tricks used by their counterparts in the West. 
Even more outrageous is some politicians play the filibustering game simply because they can and because they are in opposition. 
This attitude has now become extremely rare in Western democracies such as the UK and the US because of anti-filibustering measures adopted by their legislatures after growing public discontent. In Hong Kong, however, the public does not realize they can stop such irresponsible behavior. They can do this by withholding support in elections for lawmakers who have sponsored filibusters. 
The filibuster was never part of a legislator's duties. Just because LegCo rules don't forbid filibusters does not mean lawmakers should sponsor them freely. As voters, we have the right to demand strict limits on them - if not an end to filibustering. After all, democracy is meant to serve the public. No one should be allowed to abuse power given to them by voters - for personal benefit. Every Hong Kong resident should voice their objections to a lawmaker who defies the public interest. They should also demand proper penalties for such abuses of power. 
It should be noted too that just because the sponsors of filibuster bills are "pan-democratic" parties does not mean they are always right - even if their supporters in the media say so. No one has to accept everything with a "democratic label" blindly when the public interest is at stake. True democracy is one that serves and protects the public and one which people trust. This is not what politicians with ulterior motives want us to believe. 
The author is a current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 04/15/2014 page9)

