 
I had proposed that for the Chief Executive election in 2017, two rounds of voting should take place. The first round would allow voters to support or reject a candidate. The number of positive votes minus the number of negative votes is "net support". Two candidates with the highest net support will go into the second round, in which voters will cast one vote for the candidate of their choice. 
This proposal was criticized by some as being "too complicated", "unnecessary", and "untried elsewhere". 
I categorically reject all these criticisms. The proposal is certainly not "too complicated". It only requires voters to say whether they support or reject a candidate. If this is too complicated they certainly do not qualify to be voters. 
I also proposed electronic voting. Under each candidate's name is a support and a reject button. The voter only needs to press two times to use up his first round votes. He can support two candidates, reject two candidates, or support one and reject another one. 
The system will then count, for each candidate, the positive votes minus the negative ones. Two candidates with the largest net positive votes will become finalists. How can this be complicated? 



I will demonstrate why this is necessary. Take, for example, the proposal which was put forward by 18 academics. They suggested that if no candidate won more than half the votes, two candidates with the largest support will go into the second round. But if a candidate wins more than 50 percent of the votes, he or she will have won the election. Suppose a candidate is keenly supported by 40 percent of voters and vehemently hated by 40 percent of voters. Those who support this candidate have a very strong incentive to cast their votes, because they know what they want. Suppose they all cast their votes. If those who vehemently hate the candidate cannot cast a vote to reject him, the chances are that they may not turn up at the ballot box. Although they know who they don't want, they may not have a favorite candidate. Suppose only half of them have a favorite candidate, then only 20 percent of the votes will go to this favorite candidate. Suppose only half of the rest of the voters turn up supporting other candidates, then we will end up with 40 percent of voters casting a vote in favor of a candidate that is hated by 40 percent of voters. With just 30 percent of voters casting a vote in favor of other candidates, the divisive candidate who does not command popular support wins the election. 
Allowing a negative vote in the first round will allow voters' preferences to be more accurately reflected in their votes. Certainly this is more democratic. The negative vote will effectively allow voters to screen out divisive candidates who, if elected, will likely have a rough time governing. 
To say that simply because it is untried elsewhere it is not going to work is to say no to genuine innovation. Aren't we supposed to be living in a knowledge-based society that encourages new ideas? 
Some critics say that under such a system, while the two finalists are likely to be moderates they are also likely to be "wishy washy". It is not clear to me why the system will generate "wishy washy" finalists. It is true that even good and effective leaders will be hated by someone. But if someone attracts a lot of rejections or non-confidence votes, it is highly unlikely that person can be an effective leader. 
It is interesting to note that although no country currently practices negative votes the way I proposed, the Chief Justice of India ruled last year that voting machines and ballot papers should be modified to allow voters to reject all candidates on the ballot sheet. Reading out the judgment, Chief Justice Palanisamy Sathasivam said: "Democracy is all about choices and voters will be empowered by this right of negative voting. Negative voting will send a clear signal to political parties and candidates as to what the voters think about them." 
The Election Commission of India supported the ruling of the Chief Judge. But if the logic is sound, it is not clear why voters cannot selectively reject a candidate they dislike, and why they must either support a candidate of their choice or reject all candidates on the ballot. 
All in all, we can say that allowing a negative vote in the first round is administratively simple. It is more democratic. It will motivate a higher turnout at the polls, and thus will lend greater credibility and legitimacy to the candidate who wins. It will screen out divisive candidates, and will increase the chances for electing a candidate acceptable to both Hong Kong's people and to the central government. And this may well be the key to successful political reform in Hong Kong! 
The author is a director of the Center for Public Policy Studies at Lingnan University. 

(HK Edition 04/08/2014 page9)

