 



The looming prospect of a "fiscal cliff" has left Legislative Council President Jasper Tsang Yok-sing no choice but to take action to end the budget debate filibuster. 
Aside from threatening the normal operations of government, the latest political stunt by a few radical lawmakers has virtually paralyzed the legislature. It has also delayed other bills of the same significance to the public. 
Pending a clear-cut mechanism to be put in place to stop such abusive manipulations in the chamber, the LegCo president has to call the shots. This is a duty as well as a power vested in the president by existing rules of procedure which govern operation of the legislature. This exclusive power of the LegCo president to keep the chamber efficient and uphold the public interest was reaffirmed by a court verdict last year. 
Tsang is expected to come under fierce attack by the radicals for any move to halt the filibuster. He may probably be accused of being "arbitrary", or "undemocratic" in his actions. This has happened with previous filibusters. 
But he can be sure the public will be on his side. For democracy to work, effective checks and balances are essential not only for preventing the tyranny of the majority but also that of the minority. By staging meaningless filibusters and derailing the provision of public services, radical members of the legislature have not only breached their duties as lawmakers, but also betrayed democracy. 
It is widely hoped that some amendments to the rules of procedure of LegCo will provide the chamber with an effective mechanism to prevent prolonged filibusters in future. However well-designed a system or a mechanism is, it is unlikely to be perfect. Radical lawmakers can always find ways to create hindrances and exploit loopholes. 
The ultimate solution to a filibuster rests with our citizens. Radical lawmakers have purposely kept on staging political stunts, including filibusters, to secure their radical constituencies. They have managed to win seats in the legislature by exploiting the current electoral system of proportional representation - despite the small size of their radical constituencies. This tactic could be defeated if moderate voters, who were absent during the previous election, participate in future elections and cast their votes for opponents of the radicals. 

(HK Edition 05/21/2014 page9)

