



Zhang Xiaoming, director of the Liaison Office of the Central People's Government in the HKSAR, on Tuesday discussed Hong Kong's constitutional development with representatives of the Civic Party and the Labour Party. It was the last of four such meetings, hosted by Chief Secretary Carrie Lam. She told reporters afterwards people at the meeting had been cordial and frank. 
The opposition parties are understandably "disappointed" that Zhang did not agree with them on some "key" issues. These are "prerequisites" for Chief Executive (CE) election candidacy and "screening" in the nomination process. 
Given that most of the "pan-democrat" representatives are members of the Legislative Council (LegCo), they should understand that Zhang cannot speak for the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) on constitutional affairs unless authorized to do so. The NPCSC will deliberate over those issues at a plenary session later this month. Until then all we can do is wait for the news. This is common knowledge, especially for those in power. 
There is no question that the meetings Zhang held with opposition politicians are a good start towards achieving consensus on implementing universal suffrage in the 2017 CE Election. This can only be achieved by conforming to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC. Constructive dialogue, however difficult, is always better than violent confrontation. We all know "Occupy Central" is an example of irrational confrontation which can easily turn violent. It could do severe damage to Hong Kong's economy and social stability. 
The massive turnout for the march on Sunday in support of implementing universal suffrage according to the Basic Law and against "Occupy" sent a clear message. It told the "occupiers" that Hong Kong is overwhelmingly opposed to their unlawful intentions and illegal acts. 
It is a shame the "Occupy" organizers remain committed to their campaign. They will end up hurting many businesses and trampling on people's rights by paralyzing traffic in Central if the NPCSC refuses to meet their unconstitutional demands. Their refusal to abandon the planned protests shows they have no respect for the concerns of ordinary people. They don't mind using democracy as an excuse to hurt the public interest for personal gain. 
All real pro-democracy organizations and individuals should realize that "Occupy" cannot be justified. No one has the right to sacrifice the interests of society in favor of their own motives. We hope the "occupiers" and those who support them realize most Hong Kong residents stand to lose if they continue with their plans. 

(HK Edition 08/20/2014 page9)

