


      Cheung Chi-kong, a member of the Executive Council and executive director of the One Country Two Systems Research Institute Ltd, told a symposium on Monday that the success of "One Country, Two Systems" was vital to Hong Kong. "If 'One Country, Two Systems' fails Hong Kong will die," he warned.
      
        Cheung's comment is no exaggeration at all. It is common knowledge that the central government promised Hong Kong "One Country, Two Systems" when Beijing negotiated with the British government about resuming sovereign rule over Hong Kong. The truth is Hong Kong, as a special administrative region (SAR) of the People's Republic of China, has successfully maintained its prosperity and stability under "One Country, Two Systems" since the handover in 1997, despite facing many challenges over the years. This is definite proof the principle has been working effectively - as it was designed to.
        
          Certain political forces here and abroad have been trying to prove "One Country, Two Systems" does not, or cannot work. They have been creating all kinds of trouble to jeopardize Hong Kong's stability and prosperity - but to no avail. Now, they are blaming the central government and mainland compatriots for some of the problems Hong Kong is experiencing. They claim these issues prove "One Country, Two Systems" is failing. However, they have yet to explain why similar problems exist in so many countries around the world without "One Country, Two Systems" - not the least in the "leading democracies" in the West.
          
            Some people here and overseas are also trying to convince the public that "One Country, Two Systems" is all about democracy in Hong Kong, even though the truth is "Two Systems" refers to different social systems - socialism on the mainland and capitalism in Hong Kong. They also attempt to mislead the public by ignoring the fact the British government began very limited democratic reform in Hong Kong only toward the end of its colonial rule. It was the Chinese central government that promised the city not only "One Country, Two Systems" - but democracy as well.
            
              There is no telling how long the British would have withheld democracy for Hong Kong had London successfully persuaded Beijing to let its colonial rule continue. But one thing is certain: Without the mainland, Hong Kong's economy could not have been so successful in past decades. And make no mistake about it: Hong Kong's success since the "Asian Tiger" days has little if anything to do with democracy.
              
                On the other hand, it was able to withstand the test of such overwhelming difficulties as the Asian financial crisis of 1997, the SARS epidemic of 2003 and the global financial crisis of 2008, with no small help from the mainland. All these success stories are proof that "One Country, Two Systems" not only works, but is vital to Hong Kong.
                
(HK Edition 05/20/2014 page9)

