
The organizers have called the occupation movement "Occupy Central with Love and Peace". 
The movement turns out not to be characterized by either of these attributes. If you notice the hidden discourse of sex behind the movement, you might wonder whether naming it "Occupy Central with Sex" could have attracted more young people. In fact, the subject may even be the key to the solution for the current impasse. 
"Several students have been attacked with reports of sexual assaults, and some journalists have also been targeted (sic)," wrote Cassie Ryan at Vision Times. This is one of the most amusing sentences I have read in 2014. 
How can people be attacked with reports, and how come these journalists were merely "targeted" but not harmed? 
True, there were reports of sexual assault and harassment at the protest sites. However, many of the allegations are clearly unsubstantiated. I have looked at a number of videos alleging sexual assault. Most of them hardly prove any physical contact, let alone intent to act with impropriety. 
On the other hand, anti-"Occupy" supporters have also claimed young people, perhaps minors, have engaged in coitus inside the tents. Local Chinese newspapers have also reported that the police arrested a gay rights activist for allegedly molesting a boy who often stayed overnight on a protest site. None of the English language media reported anything on the gay rights activist story. It seems that the English language media no longer reports incidents that show the gay movement in a less-than-favorable light. 
Some of the conduct detailed above, if proven to be true, is not only appalling but also illegal. Many other allegations are either groundless or may even have been malicious. However, the fact that so many - from both camps - are using sex as a weapon to defame opponents, illustrates how conservative a society Hong Kong still is. 
Survey after survey demonstrates that the city's youth are among the most conservative in the world when it comes to sex, more specifically opinions on sex. They remain more conservative than their counterparts on the mainland. This curious mixture of the conservative social outlook of our youth (notice the elaborate weddings many of them insist on having) and their obvious liberal outlook in politics, is worth examining. 
In his famous book The Closing of the American Mind, Allan Bloom described "how higher education has failed democracy and impoverished the souls of today's students". 



Bloom believes the root of the problem to be contemporary liberal education. For him, the failure of liberal education leads to the sterile social and sexual habits of modern students, and to their inability to fashion a life for themselves beyond the mundane offerings touted as success. Relativism, he said, makes students conformist and incurious. Their supposed open-mindedness closes their actual minds. 
The fact that openness may lead to closed minds may sound illogical to those unfamiliar with dialectical reasoning, but it is precisely what we are witnessing here in Hong Kong with our Liberal Studies lessons. 
However, the contexts are completely different. The particular issue Bloom addresses is what he calls "the de-eroticization of the world", for he believes that the removal of social constraints on sexual activity has led to the disappearance of imagination and genuine feeling from personal relationships. His conservative critique is a reaction to the excess of modern liberal philosophy, which in turn was a reaction to an era of more oppressive conservative thought. Hong Kong is many cycles behind this evolution. 
Our youth are by no means relativist, and our liberal studies are certainly not developing them in that direction. In fact, they may be the most dogmatic in recent generations, and this dogmatism is where their social and political outlooks align. 
Bloom wrote: "The liberally educated person is one who is able to resist the easy and preferred answers, not because he is obstinate but because he knows others worthy of consideration." That is exactly the quality our society and our students are missing. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 12/02/2014 page1)

