 
The "Occupy Central referendum" organized by the radical faction of the opposition campwrapped up on Sunday as all political parties and groups involvedmade their last effort to persuade asmany people as they could to support this unconstitutional poll.However, nomatter howhard they try, this pollwill have no legal status. 
According towellestablished international understanding, a referendumis the utmost constitutional exercise of direct democracy in representative democracies around theworld. Itmust be initiated by the executive and legislative branches of the government and approved by the judiciary, according to the country's constitution.HongKong is a special administrative region of the country, and therefore does not have constitutional authority to hold a referendum.Only the Central People'sGovernment can be authorized to call a referendumwhen theNational People's Congress finds it necessary and convinces the Supreme People's Court to give its blessing. 
The "Occupy Central referendum" organizers arewell aware of this basic constitutional knowledge, but theywent aheadwith their unconstitutional exercise, once again baring their readiness to break ruleswhenever they feel like doing so. They call it a "popular vote", only to be reminded by the SAR government that HongKong's existing lawhas nothing of the sort in its relevant codes.Where has their obsessionwith international standards gonewhen they count? 
The socalled popular vote is supposed to decidewhich of three nominationmethods should be adopted in the 2017 Chief Executive election, presumably by universal suffrage. The problem 
is that all three formats are practically identical in design and purpose. And the organizers havemade it crystal clear that all votes will be counted as supporting the opposition camp's unconstitutional demands, nomatterwhich format one chooses. 
What is evenmore amazing is that theUS government has repeatedly expressed unconditional support for this poll in addition 
to funding illegal activities inHongKong through various "private" channels.Nowtheworld iswitnessing yet another unconstitutional political charade orchestrated in the name of freedomand democracy. 
The central government has been sincere in advancing democracy inHongKong. Theway forward iswell outlined by the Basic Lawand decisions of theNational People's Congress Standing Committee. Any other propositions are not constitutionally viable. 

(China Daily USA 06/30/2014 page12)

