 
Tens of thousands of people took to the streets on the 17th anniversary of the handover and voiced their opinions on a wide range of issues on Tuesday. With the dispute over Hong Kong's constitutional development raging, the opposition camp set out to make the day all about what it calls "true democracy". The most radical of the opposition groups said they would stage a sit-in outside the SAR government overnight, an act that might well kick off "Occupy Central" ahead of schedule. The Police Force is taking the threat seriously and on Monday started putting the necessary measures in place to prevent the situation from spiraling out of control. 
An unprecedented political struggle is about to start. It is a matter of life and death for Hong Kong as the two sides prepare to duel for the city's governing power. The SAR government and those concerned have tried to persuade opposition parties not to fire the first shot, so to speak, and hopefully end the feud peacefully. Some believe the political fight in Hong Kong has reached a critical point. 
The simplest way to defuse the ticking time bomb would be a concession by the SAR government that would satisfy the opposition's demands for "genuine universal suffrage" according to "international standards". That, however, would mean opening the door for the opposition to seize Hong Kong's governing power by hijacking popular support and electing someone loyal to the Western powers behind the opposition camp. The result would be further confrontation until the opposition realizes its goal of "Hong Kong independence". 
This scenario is not some scary fantasy. The current political situation sees the opposition maintain an obvious edge over the government and the pro-establishment camp in the war of words; while some in the legal profession are helping the opposition out of ulterior motives. With Western powers offering whatever assistance the opposition needs, a color revolution can break out any minute now. This is not saying the central government will let it happen, but the cost could be Hong Kong's hard-earned success if the central authorities are forced to step in and end political violence with force. 
To turn the current messy situation in Hong Kong around we must be realistic and do whatever necessary. To quote the late Chairman Mao, "Dust will remain until the broom sweeps it away." The only way to restore stability in Hong Kong is to put the troublemakers in check. 
First of all the political superstructure has to change. Not only must the Chief Executive be patriotic but all the principal officials of the SAR government and members of the judiciary as well. Secondly the political elite must abandon their preference for the rich and focus instead upon the patriotic working masses and win their trust and support with the respect they deserve. Thirdly invest more resources in counterbalancing the opposition on media firepower and beef up patriotic education. Last but not the least we must complete the national security legislation according to Article 23 of the Basic Law as soon as possible to ensure Hong Kong's democratic development is free of foreign interference and contribute to national security. 
It will not be an easy task to say the least, but there is no question we must do our best to push Hong Kong back onto the right track. To ensure the "One Country, Two Systems" policy works well in Hong Kong we have to do whatever necessary to fend off any attack by the opposition. Playing nice is no longer effective or necessary, as the opposition has already stopped pretending to be reasonable. We must be tough on the troublemakers, because there is no reward for turning the other cheek after getting slapped in one. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 07/02/2014 page9)

