



Hong Kong has been brought to a standstill in recent weeks as the "Occupy Central" campaign clogged transport arteries, causing traffic jams. Clashes between demonstrators and local business owners, taxi drivers, and other residents have become commonplace due to the strain placed on the economy by the protests. 
Irrespective of whether one supports the movement or not, it is self-evident the sustained protest strategy has long ceased to be constructive. The number of participants has dwindled to the low hundreds in most cases. As evidenced by reports and video footage of chaotic altercations, the persistence of the movement is undermining the city's social fabric and stability. Support for the "Occupy" camp is also being eroded as disruption of business and transport persists. 
"Occupy" is the latest manifestation of an increasingly common kind of movement; whereby a consolidated group of frustrated young demonstrators occupy public areas and refuse to disperse until their demands are met. Older protest leaders and opportunistic opposition politicians set the agenda, while crowds of students reinforce their demands on the streets. In the push to achieve the campaign's goals, the negative impact on local business and people's lives are of little concern - mere collateral damage. 
While movements like these tend to crop up in highly polarized societies, protesters will shrewdly accept nothing less than their demands, even if they represent a contentious minority position. That these groups sing the praises of "democracy" makes for good satire. However, to dismiss them altogether - as an annoyance or threat to public disorder - obfuscates important political signals which need to be heard. 
With regards to Hong Kong, an extremely complex set of social and economic factors motivates and fuels the protest movement. The rise of mainland cities as shipping and financial hubs casts a shadow over Hong Kong, which has long ceased to serve as an exclusive gateway to China for foreign investors and banks. 
Beijing has taken a hands-off approach to Hong Kong, allowing the territory to operate with a high degree of political autonomy. While there is little evidence of the central government trying to assert its authority and systems onto the territory, the huge volume of mainlanders visiting Hong Kong as tourists and property speculators, have instilled in many the notion that Hong Kong risks being absorbed into the mainland's social and cultural milieu. 
The idea of protecting the city's unique identity from absorption into the larger entity propounds demonstrators with an ardent sense of urgency and justice. Hong Kong is undeniably rife with chauvinistic attitudes toward mainlanders. The demonstrations, in turn, have become an avenue for protesters to assert their status and identity, veiled under a homogenizing pro-democracy banner. Mainland reactions to the protests have been lukewarm because these sentiments can be widely inferred. 
Another more obvious factor is economic in nature, pertaining to the territory's soaring income inequalities and the increasing difficulty to keep up with the cost of living. The "Hong Kong dream" is fast evaporating, as young people increasingly view barriers to home-ownership and greater material affluence as becoming ever more pronounced. 
International media coverage, echoing Western governments' sympathetic statements in the protesters favor, has oversimplified the "Occupy" movement by overlooking questions of identity and dislocation. The movement has been framed through a familiar cookie-cutter narrative, averse to criticizing the student movement while often exaggerating the extent of police misconduct. 
Tear gas was used to disperse protesters only after students attempted to storm government buildings. In contrast to the heavy-handed police brutality often demonstrated in Europe and the United States, Hong Kong police actions were highly restrained. These demonstrations have proven beyond doubt that the Hong Kong authorities have respected their citizens' rights to assemble. 
Western media has also mischaracterized the historical Sino-British treaty that set conditions for the handover, while obfuscating a critical point: Implementing the universal suffrage system was Beijing's idea. Nowhere in the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration is universal suffrage mentioned. 
As it pertains to the Basic Law, the Chief Executive (CE) will be elected by universal suffrage upon nomination by a broadly representative Nominating Committee (NC). 
There is no substance to the allegation that China "reneged on its commitment" to universal suffrage, because the law always stipulated that a NC would approve CE candidates. By selectively reporting from pro-"Occupy" perspectives, Western media has created the impression that Beijing is suppressing democracy, when in fact the population will be directly electing the CE through one person, one vote for the first time in history in 2017. 
The one person, one vote system never featured in life under British colonial rule. By 2020, both the CE and Legislative Council will be elected through universal suffrage, a move toward popular ballot-box politics. A 1,200-member electoral college currently elects the Chief Executive; direct elections will therefore undeniably be more representative than the current arrangement. 
It is unsurprising that those associated with the "Occupy" movement - student leaders or opposition politicians - have a relationship with the US government, through its foundation, the National Endowment for Democracy (NED). The organization channeled hundreds of thousands into programs to mobilize university students to demand universal suffrage, while the media has campaigned on their behalf, romanticizing the so-called Umbrella Revolution on 24-hour news cycles in the West. 
US support for demonstrations in Hong Kong should be seen as part of a wider strategy by Washington to encourage agitation in China's peripheral regions and territorial disputes. Shortly the protest movement will end, but the complex attitudes driving the discontent will be difficult to placate. Dialogue between the government and opposing forces must eventually happen, but the movement needs to know when to compromise. 
The author is a Kuala Lumpur-based freelance journalist who is also a research associate with the International Movement for a Just World. The article first appeared in The Star. 

(HK Edition 10/30/2014 page1)

