



After obtaining 1.5 million signatures over the past month, the Anti-"Occupy Central" petition ended on Aug 17 impressively - more than 190,000 people demonstrated, denouncing the illegal "Occupy" movement. That afternoon, strong and determined cries of "stop 'Occupy Central' campaign" resonated in the streets. People at Victoria Harbour realized this was a significant time for the patriotic camp. It had been able to mobilize hundreds of thousands of people and counter the anti-Beijing camp - who have dominated Hong Kong politics since the 1980s. The march - along with the month-long anti-"Occupy" petition - was indeed an important milestone for Hong Kong. 
Over the past three decades, the patriotic camp consistently expressed its political stance in a moderate way. Since the July 1997 handover the patriots have refrained from any protests aimed directly against the opposition. This was out of respect for the SAR's political and social stability. Even after the opposition's massive demonstration on July 1, 2003 the patriots avoided any "tit for tat" protests. 
But "Occupy" campaign changed everything. Although some radical members of the opposition want to make Hong Kong an independent political entity and topple the central government, their actions had not broken any laws. But then the "Occupy" organizers announced they would disrupt public order to force Beijing to meet their demands. The city's rule of law was threatened. As Chief Executive (CE) Leung Chun-ying said: "There is no neutrality or 'middle ground' between breaking the law and not breaking the law." Because of this, the patriots have no option but to take a stand against "Occupy". 
Furthermore, it is vital for the SAR's constitutional status that the 2017 CE election by "one person, one vote" is conducted in accordance with the Basic Law and relevant NPCSC decisions. This is an issue of national security too. The true intentions of "Occupy" are to alienate the SAR from the nation. Thus, the patriots have to contain this illegal movement and expose its true intentions. 
The political divisions in Hong Kong are difficult to reconcile. These can be traced back to the colonial era. The core of the anti-Beijing forces consist of different interest groups which sprang up under British rule. This is in contrast to the backbone of the "Love Nation, Love Hong Kong" camp who developed from an anti-colonial background. After London announced, shortly before the Sino-British Joint Declaration was signed, that Western democracy would be introduced into Hong Kong, the anti- and pro-colonial forces became the patriotic and anti-Beijing camps. Before the handover, the patriotic camp wanted to strictly conform to the joint declaration and consensus between Beijing and London. But opposition camp backed the last governor Chris Patten, who began introducing some controversial political reforms. In the process he violated earlier agreements between Britain and China. 
After the handover, both camps shifted their focus on the SAR's constitutional development - the opposition wanted to achieve London's dream of introducing Western-style democracy into Hong Kong. The patriotic camp wanted any new political reforms to strictly conform to the Basic Law. 
According to Article 45 of the Basic Law, the SAR will be able to elect the CE by universal suffrage. However, no matter what methods for electing the CE are adopted, the current constitutional relationship between the CE and the central government and between the SAR and the nation should remain the same. 
Over the past month, while firmly defending the rule of law and the right track for the SAR's constitutional development, the "Love Nation, Love Hong Kong" camp has raised its profile significantly. The Wall Street Journal reported on Aug 15 that community support for "Occupy" appears to be waning. "Occupy" was once described as a "nuclear bomb" by its initiator. It will probably be ignited after the NPCSC decides which mechanism it wants for 2017 CE election. But the size of the "Occupy" protests and their impact on Hong Kong will probably now be more restrained. 
But the patriots still have to be prepared. Their petition campaign was a great start. A campaign like this should be organized again in future to help stabilize the political situation in Hong Kong. As the white paper issued by the central government pointed out: "One Country" is the premise and basis of "Two Systems". In the long term, it will be necessary to mobilize Hong Kong people under the banner of "Love the Nation, Love Hong Kong". The aim is to build a solid base in the community to defend the great idea of "One Country, Two Systems". 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 08/20/2014 page9)

