
Hong Kong's renown as "Pearl of the East" was earned through much hard work by generations of local people. Seventeen years ago sovereign rule of the territory returned to China under the constitutional framework of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle. More than one and a half centuries of British colonial rule has ended. As someone born and raised in Hong Kong, who has been away for decades, I never stop thinking about the place. In recent years, however, I have often felt a sense of loss, even dismay about Hong Kong. Why? Is it because the city has experienced endless controversial, disturbing and even destructive incidents which have filled me with lament? I often ask when Hong Kong will regain its old spirit of constantly striving for success. 
I left Hong Kong to live overseas many years ago. Based on news reports I believe the confusing political situation and confrontational social environment was probably brought about by two factors. I wish more people could understand this; then they could examine the situation rationally and make an informed judgment. 
One factor is that many Hongkongers may not understand the jurisdictional arrangements for Hong Kong following the handover. This is because they have either overlooked the fact that China has regained sovereign rule over Hong Kong or have been misled by people, with ulterior motives, to forget about this fact. The other factor is that many Hongkongers do not understand the realities facing the territory. They have also developed an identity crisis - the result of manipulation by irresponsible people - many youth, particularly those born in the 1980s and 1990s, are confused about their identity. 
Here I will share my personal understanding of Hong Kong's return to China. This is to help interpret these two factors. It may also give a reality check to those hoodwinked into believing in the "freedom and democracy" myth. Then, more people will realize that reaching consensus through rational discussion is the best way forward. 
First, Hongkongers must respect history. The central government has to respect Hong Kong's laws and customs developed under colonial rule, but equally Hongkongers have to respect the fact that Britain handed Hong Kong's sovereign rule back to China on July 1, 1997. This was a decision agreed upon by the Chinese and British governments and ratified by the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration. Chris Patten, the last colonial governor, recently commented publicly on Hong Kong's constitutional reform. His comments left me with the impression he may have forgotten the content of the joint declaration. This document stated at the beginning that China would regain sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1, 1997, when the area including Hong Kong Island, Kowloon and the New Territories would cease to be a British colony. 
It may be 17 years since the handover, but neither Patten (nor anyone else) has any right to treat this as irrelevant, or that the legally binding bilateral agreement is no longer significant. People should remember the definition of "sovereignty" in international law. In layman's terms, it means the British government was in charge of Hong Kong affairs when it exercised sovereignty over the territory. Colonial governors pledged their loyalty to the British Crown upon assuming office. 
Did Hong Kong citizens have public nomination or universal suffrage then? Now some politicians are demanding the "international community" supervise Hong Kong's constitutional development. That is completely unthinkable according to international law. China now exercises sovereignty over Hong Kong, how can anyone even think of letting foreign countries dictate how the SAR should be governed? Did the US government ever press London to give Hong Kong democracy under colonial rule? Is it really wrong to require the Chief Executive as well as locals, including those in the judiciary, to love the nation and Hong Kong? I hope those who oppose China's sovereign rule over Hong Kong realize they are also rejecting the core principle of the Sino-British Joint Declaration which was recognized by the international community. 
The overriding premise of "One Country" cannot be any clearer or easier to understand. The joint declaration also stresses another important fact: On the basis of "One Country" is the foundation of "Two Systems". Since the handover Hong Kong has become a special administrative region of China. The country guarantees that Hong Kong's economic and social freedoms, as enjoyed under colonial rule, would not change for 50 years after the handover. This is another important part of the joint declaration and is enshrined in the Basic Law. 
The Basic Law was promulgated according to the nation's Constitution by the National People's Congress and its Standing Committee (NPCSC) in particular. The NPCSC is solely responsible for interpreting and, when necessary, amending the Basic Law. Those who claim they can "force" the central government to amend the Basic Law in their favor to meet "international standards" for representative democracy need to prove such "standards" exist. They must provide evidence the SARs of Hong Kong and Macao are not unique to China. Hong Kong is not an independent political entity or a society with much experience in party politics. It is a SAR enjoying a high degree of autonomy in accordance with the Basic Law, which does not recognize "public nomination", period. 
The author is director of the Chinese in Britain Forum and former mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10). He also served as a member of London's City Council for 12 years. The Chinese version of this article first appeared in the Chinese Business Gazette. 

(HK Edition 11/04/2014 page10)

