 
The rift in the opposition camp is deepening. On the third "Deliberation Day" (D-Day 3) organized by the "Occupy Central" illegal campaign on May 6, three constitutional reform plans proposed by the radical groups leading the "Occupy" movement were chosen by "voters". This was in order to enter a citywide "referendum" scheduled for June 22. Those proposed by moderate opposition parties lost out. In response, senior members of the Democratic Party (DP) and Civic Party (CP) strongly criticized the "rigged" vote. 
The radical faction has not only taken control of the "Occupy" campaign, it has also influenced the mainstream opposition parties. So the HKSAR Government's Task Force on Constitutional Development (TFCD) has been stepping up its efforts to keep the second phase of public consultation on arrangements for the Chief Executive (CE) election in 2017 and Legislative Council (LegCo) election in 2016 on track. 
On May 15, the three-member TFCD - Chief Secretary Carrie Lam, Justice Secretary Rimsky Yuen and Secretary for Constitutional and Mainland Affairs Raymond Tam - spoke to the press. They said that because of legal and political inadequacies, proposals not complying with the Basic Law or relevant decisions by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC), including the Alliance for True Democracy's "three-track format", were "very unlikely" to be included in the second phase of the public consultation. Lam urged Hong Kong citizens to think carefully before supporting any of the three radical proposals on June 22. Meanwhile, Tam confirmed that the models suggested by "moderate pan-democrats", such as allowing the public to "recommend" candidates in a non-binding manner, were still viable. 



The TFCD appears intent on directing public attention to the composition of the Nominating Committee (NC) and procedures for nominating CE candidates by the NC. However, Lam said the government still believed in a "middle ground". This suggests the TFCD still wants to reach some kind of compromise with "moderate pan-democrats". 
A serious question was raised: On what issue exactly are the two factions of the opposition camp - the radical and the moderate - arguing about? 
On May 16, Ray Yep, research director of the Synergynet and professor at the Department of Public Policy of the City University of Hong Kong, answered this question in an opinion piece in Ming Pao. Yep said current disputes on constitutional development concern not only whether Hong Kong will have "genuine universal suffrage" but also how it will address its relationship with the central government. Among the pan-democrats, there are two different views: The radical groups are determined to counter the central government authorities and defy the Basic Law. But the moderates, while critical of Beijing on most political issues, recognize the existing constitutional framework. 
I do not agree with everything Yep wrote, but I appreciate his observations. Today, Hong Kong is at the crossroads. There are not only two rival political camps - the opposition and the patriotic ones - but also two factions of the opposition. Nevertheless, the "moderate pan-democrats" consist of a few LegCo members and some professionals and academics. These people have no significant influence on the city's constitutional development. 
More importantly, their opinions and proposals, to some extent, are not consistent with the Basic Law. For example, the proposal by 18 academics does not insist that anyone recommended by the public automatically becomes a CE candidate. But the "public recommendation" in their proposal will still be a legitimate part of the process to select CE candidates. This means the NC will not be the only legal instrument for the job. But this is an obvious departure from the Basic Law and the NPCSC decisions on the issue. 
Worse is that political radicalization is now so rampant it is largely unstoppable. Former chief secretary Anson Chan has appealed to the DP, CP and Labor Party (LP) to join the "moderate pan-democrats". But the feedback is not encouraging. On the other hand, the "Love the Nation and Love Hong Kong" camp remains steadfastly committed to the fundamental requirement that the CE must be a true patriot when elected by universal suffrage. It seems there is no chance a compromise can be reached between the two camps. Thus, the TFCD needs to answer another question: If no consensus can be achieved on the process of CE election by universal suffrage, what will they do? 
I suggest that from the beginning of the second phase of public consultation, the TFCD lead the community to discuss the most important question for the SAR instead of obsessing over technical aspects of universal suffrage. The question is: Should the relationship between Hong Kong and the mainland and between the SAR government and the central government after implementation of universal suffrage be different from now? 
The radical faction of the opposition camp includes those who want Hong Kong to break away from the nation. The "moderate pan-democrats" seem to prefer a Hong Kong under China's sovereign rule - but politically independent. The SAR leadership should help Hong Kong residents fully understand the nature of the SAR. Hong Kong has been a bridge between the West and the East and between the outside world and the mainland for a long time. But this cannot change the fact that the city has always been part of China. 
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator. 

(HK Edition 05/21/2014 page9)

