


      The protest march on New Year's Day not only fell short of the organizers' expectations in terms of the size of the crowd, but failed to exhibit the kind of spirit people used to see in the past. In other words, the opposition camp can only get less than 20,000 participants for a mass protest these days. This number also shows most Hongkongers are not interested in politics.
      
        Since the July 1 mass demonstration in 2003, the number 500,000 seems to have become a historical milestone for the opposition camp and its bragging rights to popular support. It's a shame many members of the pro-establishment parties believe rather pessimistically that the balance of public support between the two rival camps is 6:4, or maybe even more in the opposition's favor. As a result the pro-establishment side has kept a low-key profile and even considered itself to be the underdog in recent years.
        
          But in truth this is just a false impression, because patriotism has long been a strong tradition for Hong Kong residents. This never faltered - even during the colonial era. Today, as China dazzles the world with awe-inspiring achievements, there is no reason to believe its detractors outnumber its supporters, but some people say they do. Why? The main reason for this false impression is that the average Hongkonger is not very interested in politics and lacks a platform to express his or her political opinions.
          
            By contrast, the opposition parties are very good at self-promotion and propaganda. They routinely exaggerate the number of participants in demonstrations they organize. That said, if the number 500,000 which they brag about was true, it only underlines how pathetic the opposition camp has become. Just look at the decreasing numbers of people in each mass protest over the years. If the 500,000-strong crowd 10 years ago is compared with a massive pop concert, then the New Year's Day protest this year would be like a trip to a karaoke lounge with a few friends!
            
              The opposition camp has made all kinds of excuses for the declining numbers in its protests. But the most ridiculous and most dangerous one has to be that peaceful and rational expression of political demands is no longer enough to ignite Hong Kong people's political passions. Therefore, they argue that more drastic means are necessary to achieve democracy. The "Occupy Central" movement is what they have prescribed to fire up the public.
              
                Ironically, many public opinion polls have shown repeatedly that most Hong Kong residents do not support the "Occupy Central" movement. This shows that extreme means are counterproductive and the opposition camp is desperate. But those determined to oppose the central government and mess up Hong Kong will not give up. They will struggle as long as they can. This is why the pro-establishment parties should not let their guard down or do nothing while the opposition raises hell. The best way to right these wrongs - in terms of deliberate misrepresentation of the political situation in Hong Kong - is to let the silent majority say "No" to the opposition's destructive tactics.
                
                  The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                  
(HK Edition 01/17/2014 page9)

