 



The Hong Kong Police Force came under an unjustified verbal attack by the opposition and its media allies after officers broke up the sit-in in Chater Garden after the July 1 protest march. Police officers detained 511 protestors for violating the Public Security Ordinance the following day. The main argument of the critics is that officers used excessive force against peaceful demonstrators. 
Such glaring expressions of contempt for the rule of law have angered the great majority of Hong Kong residents. A wave of condemnation from society has been directed at the opposition camp over an issue which is one of Hong Kong's core values. Many commentators, as well as netizens, have slammed the "occupiers" for attempting to use "true democracy" as an excuse to justify unlawful behavior. 
Evidently the opposition camp is trying to leave people with the impression that "Occupy Central" is the Hong Kong version of civil disobedience and, therefore, is above the law. In fact, breaking the law and infringing other people's rights and freedoms is what "Occupy Central" is all about. The illegal movement has nothing in common with genuine civil disobedience. The organizers of "Occupy Central" should be held responsible for damaging the reputation of a unique form of peaceful civil action. 
The police are tasked with upholding the rule of law and ensuring public safety against any attempts to upset it. It is the duty of police officers to clear away protesters staging unlawful assembly. They had to remove the "occupiers" because the latter refused to heed the authorities' repeated calls to cooperate voluntarily. The officers did everything by the book and that is a fact. 
The SAR government has stood its ground over this issue and reiterated the need to support the police in doing its job according to law. The great majority of Hong Kong residents fully understand the importance of the rule of law. They also stand firmly behind the police in its efforts to protect public safety and maintain social order. 
The reputation of the Hong Kong Police Force is well established around the world. It is widely regarded as one of the best in Asia in terms of professionalism, discipline and efficiency. The opposition camp has been trying to intimidate the police officers with all kinds of outrageous accusations. But it has never succeeded, because the public and the law are on the side of the police. They are not on the side of insincere politicians or their ill-advised followers. "Occupy Central" cannot and will not make any difference in this regard. 

(HK Edition 07/11/2014 page9)

