 



Jimmy Lai, owner of the Next Media Group, is in spotlight again for secretly donating more than HK$40 million to opposition politicians and parties in the past two years. These revelations shocked Hong Kong. None of the beneficiaries declared the donations with the authorities in accordance with the law. 
Political donations are common in Western countries. But the kind of covert "bank-rolling" exercise Lai undertook for members of the opposition camp in this case would be a huge surprise to political observers in the West. It is unthinkable that a company which is not especially profitable, such as Next Media, could donate such amounts of money to opposition parties for such a long period of time. Moreover, the donations were irregular, unlike the common practice of fund-raising during elections in Western democracies. No wonder many find this suspicious. 
Reports have surfaced that the evidence of these secret donations was illegally obtained by hacking into computers. Oddly enough, none of the "victims" informed the police about this. Normally, the opposition would complain about such invasions of their "privacy" and contact the police. Not this time. Only Anson Chan complained after she was found to have received millions of dollars from Lai over the past two years. The rest of them acted as if nothing extraordinary had happened. Their response is puzzling. 
Even more unexpected is the fact that Lai admitted providing the donations as soon as they were revealed earlier this month. This is despite the fact news reports did not mention the names of some recipients. How honest of him to "come clean" about his covert activities! But shouldn't he have considered the feelings of the people who received donations? And how does he think the voters will feel? Moreover, some of the recipients of these donations are public office holders. They can be prosecuted for breaking laws relating to corruption. Lai never warned them about such liabilities when the millions of dollars of donations were given. He may be seen as deliberately setting them up for a nasty fall. 
According to the "five-step process" for constitutional development, the Chief Executive (CE) election plan must be approved by two-thirds or more of Legislative Council (LegCo) members. Currently opposition lawmakers occupy slightly more than one-third of the LegCo seats. This means the opposition can block plans for constitutional reform if all opposition lawmakers vote against it. If this happens, it will destroy any chance of the 2017 CE election taking place by universal suffrage. This will have serious consequences. 
The central government has been quite firm in expressing its views on the methods for selecting the CE by universal suffrage in 2017 and forming the LegCo in 2016. They must be in accordance with the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC). Any attempt to bypass the Nominating Committee (NC) is also unacceptable. 
The opposition camp has developed a number of formats which argue for a system of "public nomination". Naturally, the central government has dismissed them as unconstitutional and illegal. 
In fact, some "moderate pan-democrat" LegCo members have proposed plans featuring a larger NC. Such plans are not in conflict with the Basic Law and are, therefore, negotiable. They are more likely to succeed in allowing a legitimate opposition candidate to stand for election in the 2017 CE election than "public nomination" would. However, this is undoubtedly opposed by leaders of the opposition camp. This may explain why the names of the recipients of Lai's donations were recently revealed. 
New evidence shows Lai's political donations are usually handled by Mark Simon. What is surprising is that roughly 909 pieces of evidence pointing to the donations have now emerged. This includes Lai's note saying, "Here is a check to show my appreciation. Thank you". This was attached to each donation with a reply from the recipients. 
Normally, business people check their current accounts through records kept by their banks or their accountants. It is rare for a business person to write a note with each donation but also to keep a copy of the note and the recipient's reply for future use. It is very disturbing if you ask me. Of course, Lai may intend to be a good citizen and help the police with their investigation when evidence of corruption becomes known. In Western politics such scenarios are quite common, where kingmakers find ways to discredit an unreliable ally and replace him or her with a more trustworthy one in a by-election. Is that why Lai was so calm about the current scandal? We will see. 
The author is a veteran journalist based in Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 07/31/2014 page9)

