
Rule of Law should be an expression of benevolent rectitude - benevolence manifesting in fairness to all and rectitude manifesting in adherence to good rules. 
If benevolent rectitude is not practiced within and projected without by a country, it will lose out on an important dimension of soft power. Benevolent rectitude in this context can only be projected through behavior that reflects it - unlike in the case of some other soft power values. 
Why is this important? Consider the World Map of Corruption Perceptions Index. If we look at the BRICS countries this year, China was ranked 100 out of 175 economies, behind Brazil at 65, India at 85 and South Africa at 67, although ahead of Russia at 136. As an emerging world leader China needs to be in the top 10. (The United States, ranked 10, also does less well than it should as the current leading world power.) 
The Corruption Perceptions Index, assembled by Transparency International, has received its fair share of criticism for its method, but the results are out there for all to see all the same. As a soft power specialist who recognizes the importance of rule of law both in terms of domestic and international dividends, I am impressed and heartened by President Xi Jinping's efforts to strengthen the rule of law in China. China should set its sights high. It should aim to be in the single digit rankings with the Scandinavian countries - and of course China has the cultural capital, leadership and organizational capacity and wealth - and now the will to realize this. 
The other aspect of this, though, is the most important one, the human aspect; making life better for ordinary people. 
Importantly the campaign against bureaucratic corruption in China has turned its attention to Chinese governing and security structures. It has been reported that almost 60 "tigers" are under investigation, some of them tigers that had been burning bright, and close to 200,000 officials are reported to have received disciplinary action notices. 

We have also seen reforms that end reeducation through labor and that seek to protect the judiciary from political influence. In other words there has been a good beginning to a difficult period of necessary reform. 
Western scholars and media often tend to view rule of law and democracy as related - if not inseparable. My view is that rule of law refers to a condition where fair and humanistic laws prevail in the governance of a nation and where its administration is fair. The measure of the success for this is the attractiveness of a country's judicial system - or its judicial soft power - to the population at home and partners abroad. This refers not just to the letter of the law but also its practice. 
In terms of the evolution of Chinese democracy, we know that the elections of village committees and village leaders in China's million-plus villages have been held for more than a quarter of a century. Eighty percent of China's villages have reportedly conducted satisfactory village committee elections, so we can surmise that there has been much growth in this school for democracy and considerable experience gleaned from it. Not many people outside China know of the eight recognized political parties at the national level and their role in the governance structure in relation to the project of development. While the formulation is different to that of traditional western democracies, as there is consensus within the eight-party group as to which party should govern, this and the village democracy stories need to be told. Given the deep desire for system stability, an attractive system at national level might include a Chinese version of the Electoral College in the United States. But, no doubt, in the end any model that China employs will be the result of the wisdom of the Chinese people. 
The author is director of the Soft Power Advocacy and Research Centre, Macquarie University, Australia. 


(China Daily USA 12/30/2014 page5)
