
Hong Kong's unemployment rate remained at 3.3 percent from August to October - the same as for the July to September period - according to the Census and Statistics Department. 
But the department warned on Monday of the potential impact on the job situation from the "Occupy Central" protests, which have continued for more than 50 days. 
The city's total number of people employed fell by about 7,100 from 3,785,700 in July to September this year to 3,778,600 between August and October. The labor force also decreased by about 10,800 from 3,918,600 to 3,907,800 during the same period. 
It was the fourth month Hong Kong's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate has stayed at a relatively low level of 3.3 percent. The underemployment rate, which measures the number of people who cannot find 35 hours of work a week, also remained unchanged at 1.5 percent for two months. 



While the total employment and labor force registered moderate year-on-year growth, Secretary for Labor and Welfare Matthew Cheung Kin-chung warned that the latest figures are not enough to support the short-term outlook which has been clouded by the protests. 
"As labor market indicators are lagging in nature, and with the impact of the 'Occupy' campaign on the domestic economy only likely to surface progressively in the next few months, we need to closely monitor the potential impact on employment and the income of grassroots workers," Cheung said. 
The latest data also showed that an increase in the unemployment rate was mainly observed in the foundation and superstructure works in the construction sector. As for the underemployment rate, an increase was also seen in decoration, repair and maintenance works in the buildings sector. 
JP Morgan said the lower employment and labor market expansion from the early part of the third quarter this year was mainly driven by the entry of fresh graduates in July and August, but it remained wary of the near-term prospects. 
"Going into Q4, we remain generally constructive on the external demand condition, but headwinds on domestic activity, such as retail business and accommodation services, may arise given the pro-democracy protests," it said, adding that its forecast for Hong Kong's real GDP growth now stands at 2.3 percent over-year-ago for this year and 2.5 percent for 2015. 



An HSBC report earlier this month indicated that its Hong Kong Purchasing Managers Index for October fell to 47.7 from 49.8 the previous month - the biggest month-to-month drop in three years. It said uncertain business prospects had prompted many private-sector firms to reduce staff levels for the seventh consecutive month in October, and the rate of job shedding was the strongest in 16 months. 
However, Lily Lo, an economist with DBS, estimated that the city's jobless rate would stay at the current level in the coming months. 
"'Occupy Central' has now lasted more than a month and its impact will be felt. However, even if the impact shows, I think there will only be a slight increase in the unemployment rate, probably in the retail and catering sectors," she said. 
A DBS report earlier this year showed that the SAR's unemployment rate has consistently stayed at between 3.1 percent and 3.5 percent since July 2011 although its GDP growth has been fluctuating. It said the demand for labor both locally and from the mainland has grown exponentially, while labor supply has remained stable and predictable over the years. 
agnes@chinadailyhk.com 
(HK Edition 11/18/2014 page8)

