



Speaking at a meeting with visiting members of the Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions (HKFTU) on Tuesday, Zhang Dejiang, chairman of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC), reiterated that the framework developed by the country's top legislature has the "highest constitutional power that can't be challenged or overturned". 
As such, Hong Kong can only implement universal suffrage within this framework. 
Zhang was speaking for the first time since the NPCSC handed down its principles - including that the number of CE candidates should be capped at two or three; that the frontrunners have to secure endorsement from at least half of the 1,200-strong Nominating Committee before being eligible for the city's top job. 
Everyone who follows current affairs knows the NPCSC's ruling was not made randomly. 
It was based on serious deliberations and thorough studies after listening to opinions from all sectors of Hong Kong society. 
It truly reflects the top legislature's collective will and represents the vast majority of Hong Kong people's aspirations. 
Only with the support of Hong Kong people, can the NPCSC exercise its supreme power by announcing a decision which reflects Hong Kong's actual situation and is strictly in line with the Basic Law. 
It should be noted that street politics or radicalism will lead nowhere. 
Hong Kong will never have genuine democracy until we learn to recognize the rights of others. The opposition camp should avoid resorting to confrontational street tactics - such as the "Occupy Central" campaign. 
Political stunts and vapid posturing can never sway the central government. 
This is especially true when it comes to matters of principle - as Beijing always stands firm as a rock. 
Also, "pan-democratic" lawmakers should act responsibly for the sake of Hong Kong' overall well-being, rather than for their own political gains. 
Those who gather together to veto the SAR government's constitutional reform package may be remembered as "sinners in history" for crushing 5 million Hong Kong voters' hopes of electing the Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017. 
All 27 "pan-democrats" in the Legislature Council have recently pledged to do so, yet there is still time for them to rethink what is good for Hong Kong - rationally rather than emotionally - before the reform package is tabled by the government early next year. 

(HK Edition 09/17/2014 page1)

