


      As the "Occupy Central" movement cries foul over electoral regulations decided by Beijing, few acknowledge that the proposed reforms are far more representative than any previous electoral mechanism in Hong Kong's history.
      
        Hong Kong operates with a high degree of autonomy under the framework of the "One Country, Two Systems" model, which grants its residents a higher degree of civil liberties, press freedom and political expression.
        
          The National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC), the country's highest lawmaking body, unveiled a series of stipulations in August pertaining to the 2017 election that will elect the territory's next Chief Executive (CE). It requires that all potential candidates are selected by a Nominating Committee (NC) to ensure Hong Kong's political stability.
          
            These provisions have enraged "pan-democratic" advocates who fear candidates deemed unsuitable by the central government would be barred from standing in elections. The protesters appear to have placed a greater priority on the demand that the incumbent CE resign, realizing that coaxing the NPCSC to reverse its decision is a highly unlikely outcome.
            
              Demonstrators and various Western commentators have accused Beijing of reneging on previous promises to permit universal suffrage. Some have raised concerns that China has breached the terms of the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration, an international treaty signed by Beijing and London. The situation isn't so black and white. The NPCSC did indeed agree to allow universal suffrage for CE elections in 2017 at the earliest, with Hong Kong's Legislative Council (LegCo) to be elected by universal suffrage from 2020.
              
                It must be noted that the interpretation of universal suffrage in the city's Basic Law, which has served as Hong Kong's mini-constitution since 1997, stipulates the following: "The ultimate aim is the selection of the Chief Executive by universal suffrage upon nomination by a broadly representative Nominating Committee in accordance with democratic procedures."
                
                  This effectively means that China cannot be accused of reneging on its commitments to allow Hong Kong residents full universal suffrage to vote because universal suffrage - as defined by the territory's own laws - always required that candidates be vetted by a Nominating Committee. The 1984 agreement mentioned earlier, that paved the way for the handover, made no mention of universal suffrage.
                  
                    While activists may be unhappy about accepting these legal conditions, it should be acknowledged that the planned 2017 reforms would still allow for the direct election of the CE through a "one person, one vote" mechanism for the first time in Hong Kong's history. Direct elections were never held at any point during the colonial period, while a 1,200-member electoral college - made up of elite figures and tycoons - currently elects the CE.
                    
                      Although there may be an unsavory caveat in the electoral process that requires a NC to approve candidates, the new system is a vastly more democratic process than any previously practiced in the history of Hong Kong. Popular elections are undoubtedly a significant step toward a more representative framework. It should be noted that no other part of China has been granted such voting rights. Beijing could diffuse tensions by setting broad standards for the NC that wouldn't rule out allowing moderate "pan-democrats" to stand for elections.
                      
                        Statements by Beijing officials indicate that concerns about national security have been key in shaping electoral reform for Hong Kong. Their concerns are that Western nations could take advantage of liberal legislation to help support parties and individuals in Hong Kong that were antagonistic to the central government. According to WikiLeaks, foreign intelligence agencies have a freer hand to operate in Hong Kong, while opposition figures regularly meet Western diplomats.
                        
                          Opposition politicians Martin Lee and Anson Chan recently visited officials in Washington and London to request support from Western governments, which have championed the pro-democracy movement. Chinese state-media accuses those nations of meddling in its internal affairs by enquiring into Beijing's record of promoting electoral freedoms in Hong Kong.
                          
                            The National Endowment for Democracy (NED), the notorious US government-funded foundation known for nurturing protest movements in Eastern Europe and Latin America, contributed nearly half-a-million dollars to programs intended to "develop the capacity of citizens - particularly university students - to more effectively participate in public debate on political reform allowing students and citizens to explore possible reforms leading to universal suffrage". These programs are intended to mobilize popular discontent into demonstrations of the sort Hong Kong is now experiencing.
                            
                              The Chinese media also reported that Joshua Wong - the 17-year-old student leader arrested for directing protesters to storm the Hong Kong government headquarters - has received donations and frequently met with US consulate personnel over the past three years. Jimmy Lai, the owner of the anti-Beijing Apple Daily in Taiwan and Hong Kong, also appears to have received funding from the US Republican Party for the purpose of aiding the "Occupy" movement.
                              
                                Activists should know when to compromise and draw attention to those issues that will plague the city irrespective of whether more democracy is achieved. These are: Hong Kong's income disparity, which is the widest in Asia; the influence of wealthy tycoons and property developers who set pricing through short supply; protecting the region's unique historical and cultural identity. Democracy will never be an end-all solution.
                                
                                  The author is a political analyst and photographer residing in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The article first appeared in Russia Today.
                                  
(HK Edition 11/10/2014 page10)

