
The development of a streak of rebelliousness is acknowledged as being part of growing up for most of us, starting when we were mere toddlers and going on into our teens. Generally it manifests itself in small ways in the home as the child, almost reflexively, struggles against the yoke of parental authority. Even a sharp tone in a mother's voice, or threat of punishment from an angered father, ignites long-lasting embers of resentment in the young - embers that can accumulate and eventually burst into the flames of angry defiance. 
Then, at school, each class has its sly objector with a variety of cunning ways to defy regulations on obedience and proper behavior - a rebel who attracts admiration among fellow students, and encourages imitation. 
But among Hong Kong students this typical brew of domestic and classroom angst hardly seems to be the cause of the dark mood and violence-prone conduct now gripping so many of our youth at post-secondary and university levels. 
It cannot be that today's parents are stricter disciplinarians than those of yesteryear, or that there are more troublemaking young "stirrers" in our classrooms. 
There must be another explanation, and logically it would seem that - in at least some of our academic institutions - the blame must go either to what the students are being taught, and/or the curriculum concerned. 
It is probably no coincidence that the master planner behind the "Occupy Central" campaign is Benny Tai, associate professor of law at the University of Hong Kong, while one of the co-founders of the movement is Sociology Professor Chan Kin-man. 



Are socially disruptive lessons being taught in educational institutions funded by the government and taught by educators paid by taxpayers? In the past year or so, have students' feelings about supposed civil rights and liberties been deliberately inflamed by "urgers" among our educators? 
And - most important of all - was official oversight of teacher conduct, the choice of lessons and curricula, stepped-up in the past year or so when it became obvious that the feelings of large numbers of students were being whipped up by influential "sources"? 
If Secretary for Education Eddie Ng did indeed order a thorough follow-up/clean-up, to judge from the students' ongoing misbehavior to date, there is no sign it had any effect. 
A point to bear in mind regarding Hong Kong's universities is the comparatively recent growth of the SAR's tertiary institutions. Until 50 years ago we had only two venerable institutions in the field, Hong Kong University (formed in 1911) and the Chinese University of Hong Kong (1963). Then six universities were founded in the 1990s, and Shue Yan University - the only private university in Hong Kong - in 2006. 
Additionally we acquired five post-secondary colleges, all bringing their contribution to providing more specialist education for our youth. 
On the one hand this "blooming" of tertiary and post-secondary educational opportunity was a boon to the youth of Hong Kong, especially since it coincided with the expansion of the system of student loans through the University Grants Committee. But at the same time these institutions, having recruited the best-qualified local applicants, still had to cast a wide international net to fill all remaining academic vacancies, and inevitably there is still constant "churn" among teaching posts. The end result is that some newcomers to Hong Kong bring with them radical ideas about freedom and liberty for the masses more appropriate to soapbox agitators in their native democracies than to the unique circumstances of the Hong Kong SAR. 
To such people, the present stew of agitation, demonstration and frustration in our society would arguably present an opportunity for people of such persuasion to use the classroom or lecture hall to meddle in our affairs. 
Meanwhile, now that we have been jolted into the realization that some of the "bad apples" among our politicians have long been on the take from media mogul Jimmy Lai, is it possible that financial inducements are connected with the insulting antics of rebellious students at official functions? For example, we all remember with disgust that graduation ceremony of the Academy of the Performing Arts in July last year presided over by Chief Executive Leung Chung-ying, especially the odious whippersnapper who turned his back on Leung and raised the tail of his gown while giving three "bows" with his backside at the podium - a crude variation on the ceremonial gesture accorded to the dead. It made for a priceless shot on TV - but was it possibly not "price-less" at all? Recent events show there is no end to the "stunts" taking place to keep the "Occupy Central" campaign in the public eye. Hopefully the mass head-shaving demo penetrated scalp and skull to influence commonsense in the grey matter below. 
The author is a seasoned observer of Asian affairs. 

(HK Edition 09/26/2014 page10)

