


      July is supposed to be a quiet month for educators. Students leave for the summer break; teachers do not need to return to school to work and hold regular meetings with colleagues and school leadership teams. Yes, some teachers may return to schools to counsel students when they receive Hong Kong Diploma of Secondary Education (HKDSE) results. These teachers can leave for a long vacation the day after the HKDSE results are released.
      
        However, this July is different. Why? Some students took part in the July 1 demonstration and are determined to participate in "Occupy Central" if organizers decide to hold it either in July or August.
        
          I tried my best to explain the consequences of joining "Occupy Central" including: Firstly, a criminal record leading to the possible refusal from professional bodies to accept a prospective member's application for membership; and secondly, likely rejection from a foreign country in issuing a visa for travel. Some students still insist on being a part of "Occupy Central", because they want to force the government to allow citizen nomination to be included in the Chief Executive election.
          
            It is shocking to discover that some young teachers, in particular those teaching Liberal Studies, have mobilized their pupils to participate in activities organized by the Civil Human Rights Front (CHRF) and Scholarism. These young teachers spread a message claiming that democracy is a universal value. The message has been compounded by the teachers' hatred of the mainland - something which needs to be confronted at all times.
            
              It is noticeable that many participants in the CHRF and Scholarism events either plan to, or have already begun studying subjects such as Cultural Studies, Public Administration, Philosophy, Sociology and Social Work. A sizeable number of teachers participating in these events also read these subjects at university.
              
                The damage has been done. First, will employers be willing to hire graduates from programs known for producing troublemakers? The fact that students and educators from Cultural Studies and similar subjects actively take part in events against Hong Kong stability makes their fellow classmates and students, already lack professional skills like engineering and accountancy, hard to land jobs.
                
                  Second, almost all organizers of "Occupy Central" and educators calling students for joining CHRF and Scholarism events have secure and well-paid jobs. So why should youngsters gamble away their futures when they have not even started their careers?
                  
                    Third, again one needs to return to the old question of excluding Chinese History from the core curriculum. It is striking that many students and teachers in "Occupy Central", CHRF and Scholarism consider Liberal Studies to be their favorite subject. In fact, Liberal Studies is seen as a replacement for all humanities subjects from One to Six. When it was first implemented in 1992, it aimed at cultivating a Hong Kong identity, eventually nurturing a Hong Kong-centered generation that looks beyond Hong Kong's relationship with the mainland and the historical events shaping Hong Kong and the country. Is it the time to bring back Chinese History?
                    
                      July and August are hot and humid. Let's hope that students and educators will engage in productive activities, instead of meaningless involvement in "Occupy Central".
                      
                        Jonathan Mok, history teacher at a local International Baccalaureate school
                        
(HK Edition 07/09/2014 page9)

