
The effrontery displayed by former governor Chris Patten in his article in the Financial Times is simply breathtaking. The very first sentence of his hypocritical beliefs says, "When Beijing attacks MPs for commenting on the territory, it forgets the UK has treaty obligations." 
It seems that Lord Patten needs a reminder about the history of Britain's occupation of Hong Kong - especially concerning the ceremony that took place at the Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Centre on the night of June 30, 1997, when sovereignty of the territory was handed back to the People's Republic of China. 
Any and all British responsibility for Hong Kong ceased at the stroke of midnight on that long-awaited date. What "obligations" does Britain have concerning the affairs of Hong Kong, which became a special administrative region of China when the last chimes of midnight were sounded? 
In the 158 years that Britain ruled Hong Kong as a colony what proud record of liberty and freedom did Britain grant its Chinese inhabitants? Answer: Absolutely none. And how did it enforce its authority? The British Army always had a garrison posted here that could be called on in case of emergency. In the early days of British settlement the garrison was stationed in Central. Flagstaff House in Hong Kong Park, now the Museum of Tea Ware, was where the Commander of the British Forces had his residence. 
In more recent times the garrison occupied barracks at Stanley, with Gurkha forces stationed in the New Territories to add still more firepower to the border defences there. The harbor, of course, saw various Royal Navy ships at anchor beside the naval base of HMS Tamar. Oh, yes, we were well protected by the British armed forces or were we being guarded by them and their cannons? 



Lord Patten goes on to argue that Britain has a "moral responsibility" to speak out concerning Hong Kong matters, adding that by failing to condemn the planned electoral reforms here Whitehall, through its silence, was permitting the introduction of "the kind of stage-managed democracy seen in Iran". 
It seems that Lord Patten, his imagination revving at top speed, has somehow formed the peculiar idea that the British government is holding back comment on the latest developments here because Whitehall is worried about "commercial reprisals". It might be that Whitehall has refrained from criticizing the state of affairs in Hong Kong because the latter is proving to be a more secure, organized, liveable and business-friendly place than London. Ah, yes, the Joint Declaration promises no change for 50 years following handover. Regardless, Hong Kong is not standing still. It is advancing forward on many fronts - socially, economically and certainly politically when millions of its citizens will soon have the first chance ever to elect their own leader in 2017. 
It is regrettable to find that Lord Patten has a soul mate in Sir Richard Ottaway, the influential chairman of the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, who expressed his disappointment that so far ministers had only said they would study Beijing's resolution for electing Hong Kong's Chief Executive (CE), adding: "They (the ministers) should have a position on it - it's obvious." 
What is far more likely is that David Cameron and his cabinet have got their priorities right, and are thus worried about the wars in Iraq and Syria. 
Returning to the political scene in Hong Kong, CE Leung Chun-ying has, through the empowerment of the Election Committee, a mandate to perform his stewardship of Hong Kong until the next election for the post, in 2017. The members of the Election Committee which nominated Leung were in turn chosen by prominent members of the Hong Kong community, who in turn had themselves been elected by their respective constituents. 
The Western media usually ignore the fact that Chris Patten was never actually elected to the position of governor. 
Unlike previous governors, who were traditionally career diplomats, Patten was appointed by his friend, then prime minister John Major. 
Now let's see. By what process was Chris Patten made governor of Hong Kong? He had lost his Bath parliamentary seat in the general election of April 9, 1992, despite the fact that as Conservative chairman he was mainly responsible for the party's victory. John Major brushed aside all qualified foreign office aspirants for the governorship and gave the plum posting to Patten - who otherwise would have been without a job. 
He was subsequently air-lifted from London to Hong Kong and never went through elections of any sort in which the people of Hong Kong had a say. How could someone like Chris Patten be qualified to preach democracy or, for that matter, the proper arrangements for electing Hong Kong's Chief Executive? 
The author is a seasoned observer of Asian affairs. 

(HK Edition 09/04/2014 page1)

