 



The Federation of Trade Unions (FTU) on Monday - a few days before the SAR government's five-month reform consultation ends on May 3, unveiled its proposals for the election of the Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017. There are many things of merit in the FTU's electoral package. But one noticeable feature is it requires all potential contenders - while logging their applications to run for the CE election - to attach a statement declaring their loyalty to the Basic Law, the Hong Kong SAR, and to say they endorse the Constitution of the People's Republic of China. 
Perhaps the best way to show what is deep down in one's heart is to make a declaration to Hong Kong society. FTU Honorary Chairman Cheng Yiu-tong claimed that this is actually a fundamental requirement for CE candidates, as the CE-elect eventually needs to be appointed by the central government. 
Established in 1948, FTU is the largest and one of the oldest labor groups in Hong Kong. Over the past three months, it has been seeking some 400,000 members' opinions in more than 180 affiliates and approximately 65 associated trade unions. The FTU's thought-provoking proposal certainly reflects views of the majority, especially those from the grassroots, and it is therefore worth consideration. 
Frankly, the FTU's emphasis on patriotism is hardly new. The Basic Law clearly stipulated that the CE should be a patriot, which means he or she owes allegiance to the People's Republic of China. According to Article 44, the CE should be a permanent resident of the region with no right of abode in any foreign country. Article 104 further stipulated that when assuming office, the CE, principal officials, members of the Executive Council and the Legislative Council, judges of the court at all levels and other members of the judiciary in the Hong Kong SAR must swear to uphold the Basic Law, swear allegiance to the HKSAR of the PRC. 
The FTU also suggests that CE candidates must secure the backing of at least half of the Nomination Committee. The reason is simple - majority rule is the most important procedure of a democracy. 

(HK Edition 04/29/2014 page9)

