
The Diplomat, a world-renowned current affairs magazine, published a commentary last week entitled "China's Democracy Challenge", asserting that democracy itself is the "ultimate solution to many of Beijing's problems". The author cited the "recent trouble in Hong Kong" regarding 2017 universal suffrage to support his argument. I have no idea how much the author knows about China's politics, the history of Hong Kong and current political developments, but what I do know is that his sloppy analysis will not convince clear-thinking readers. 
The article claims the issue of democracy has always been boiling under the surface since the student movement of 1989. As such, he posits, ongoing democratic squabbles and tussles in Hong Kong offer a good chance for the central government to reevaluate its policy towards political reform and democracy in the SAR and the mainland. He also forecast that the unrest in Hong Kong will be a long-term problem for Beijing; that the future Chief Executive will embark on a "mission impossible" in trying to keep the balance between serving Hong Kong and answering to Beijing due to a lack of either representation or a popular mandate. In a nutshell, the author unwisely believes democracy is a "cure-all" remedy, all thorny conflicts - both domestic and global - can be settled by the democratic panacea. 
I have nothing against Western-style democracy. But democracy is, in and of itself, a constant subject of controversy. 
In real-world political systems, including mature democracies in the West and new democracies in Asia and elsewhere, any fair-minded person may have concluded that many countries - the Philippines, Thailand, Iraq, Libya, to name a few, have not enjoyed the anticipated prosperity and stability they expected after adopting Western-style democracy. On the contrary, Asia's glittering "twin cities" - Hong Kong and Singapore have attained the most impressive economic miracles over the past few decades. These achievements, though, did not come through democracy under the leadership of a popular mandate. 



Let's further discuss the case of Hong Kong vis--vis the democratic problem raised by The Diplomat. It is commonly recognized that after the handover, Hong Kong enjoys far more elective democracy than was permitted by London during its 156-year colonial rule. The 28 British governors who ruled Hong Kong prior to 1997 were dispatched by London without a trace of democratic input from Hong Kong locals. 
Another inconvenient truth London prefers to ignore is that universal suffrage for Hong Kong was never mentioned in the Sino-British Joint Declaration. The notion of universal suffrage was first introduced in the Basic Law drafted by Beijing. In fact, the British colonial government considered "democracy" a dirty word. According to John Walden, a veteran public servant in Hong Kong for three decades, the British were convinced that "the introduction of democratic politics into Hong Kong would be the quickest and surest way to ruin Hong Kong's economy and create social and political instability". So, it is amusing that the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee in London in July announced an inquiry into whether the 1984 joint declaration was being dishonored by "undemocratic" Beijing. 
It is time for London, comfortably lording it over Hong Kong - their ill-gotten gain - since the mid-19th century to stop interfering. 
The Diplomat article is only one of the latest criticisms launched by bossy Western media over the NPCSC's resolution. 
For instance, a recently published editorial by The Wall Street Journal blasted Beijing for "breaking its democratic promise and Hong Kong people can only hold a sham election". While we must admit Hong Kong is one of the world's most vibrant cities, it is only natural it will attract global media attention. But the final ruling on the Hong Kong election in 2017 is the legal province of the NPCSC. It alone has supreme power to dictate the terms and timing of Hong Kong's political development. The nation's top legislature ruled that while everyone could vote, not everybody could run. There is nothing wrong with this, so why is the Western media so critical of Beijing when it has legitimate and complete sovereignty over Hong Kong? 
Some media pundits argue that Beijing's framework will screen out candidates from the "pan-democratic" camp and is therefore "fake democracy". But what they don't know is Hong Kong is not an independent polity. It is a special administrative region (SAR) under the rule of the central government. The high degree of autonomy enjoyed by the HKSAR is not full autonomy, nor decentralized power. It is also not inherent power, but power which comes solely from the authorization of the central government. The central government is well-aware of democracy's positive and negative aspects. This explains while fulfilling Hong Kong people's aspirations for universal suffrage, the Basic Law lays out a raft of criteria: to look into the "actual situation", and to proceed in a gradual and orderly fashion, and loving the country is something Beijing considers essential for CE candidates. This is because an unpatriotic CE could pose a serious threat to the nation's sovereignty and deviate from the path of sensible political reform. 
The author is a senior editor with China Daily Hong Kong Edition. boblee@chinadailyhk.com 

(HK Edition 09/22/2014 page9)

