
Andrew Mitchell says it is very important to teach Chinese history so young people can have a better understanding of major issues which still matter today 
Editor's note: This article is the first in a series touching on the teaching of Chinese history in Hong Kong and its effects on contemporary Hong Kong society. 
Last week I went to the Fringe Club to see Ivor Gurney - A Voice Apart, a play about the troubled English poet and composer Ivor Gurney, who was wounded and gassed during World War I (WWI). The performance was the latest in a series of events in Hong Kong to commemorate the centenary of the "Great War". 
It's a deeply moving play. And while there can be no doubting the artistic merit of the production - or, indeed, the good intentions behind it (all the proceeds were donated to the Hong Kong Ex-Servicemen's Association) - it's easy to get the impression watching the play that WWI was a purely European affair. And yet the "Great War", as any student of Chinese history will tell you, was also played out on Asian soil. 
The main theater of operations in Asia was China, where Japan was able to benefit from its ongoing alliance with Britain to seize Germany's interests in Shandong province. However, in 1917, then premier Duan Qirui reacted by bringing China into the war on the side of the Allies (Britain, France and Russia), on the condition that Germany's concessions in Shandong would be returned to China in the event of an Allies victory. 
Even before China entered the war, however, Chinese nationals had begun to be recruited for the Chinese Labour Corps (CLC), a force of around 140,000 non-combatants who carried out support work for the British and French armies on the Western Front. Identified by reference numbers rather than names, these poorly paid laborers were housed in makeshift camps that they were forbidden to leave. Nevertheless their contribution to the overall war effort was a source of great pride to many Chinese intellectuals, including Chen Duxiu, one of the founders of the Communist Party of China (CPC). "While the sun does not set on the British Empire," wrote Chen, "neither does it set on Chinese workers abroad." 
Despite the great sacrifices of the CLC members - some 10,000 are thought to have died during the course of the war - and despite its original condition for entering the war, China emerged from the 1919 Paris Peace Conference empty-handed, as Japan was rewarded for its support for the Allies with Germany's concessions in Shandong. 
The upshot in China was a huge public outcry, which developed into the May Fourth Movement, a cultural and political movement that resulted in a shift among China's reform-minded intellectuals away from the values of liberal democracy toward the doctrines of Marxism - a shift which was formalized two years later with the foundation of the CPC. 
But how much about all this does the average Hong Kong person actually know? Probably, not very much. It's hardly surprising, since before the handover the teaching of Chinese history in local schools focused almost exclusively on imperial China, while today Chinese history is one of no fewer than 21 elective subjects in the New Senior Secondary (NSS) curriculum. 
Chinese history is also far from being the most popular elective subject. According to the Hong Kong Examinations and Assessment Authority only 7,071 candidates - or less than 9 percent of the total candidature - sat the Chinese history exam for the 2014 Hong Kong Diploma of Secondary Education. The figure compares with 19,834 candidates for economics, 17,648 candidates for biology and 12,446 candidates for geography. 
And yet Chinese history is what makes China what it is today. So it's something that everyone in the country should be familiar with. For as Marcus Tullius Cicero, the Roman philosopher and politician, once said, "To be ignorant of what occurred before you were born is to remain a child." 
So what can be done to free Hong Kong people from this intellectual childhood of blissful ignorance? Well, the obvious first step would be to make Chinese history a core subject for NSS, with a syllabus focusing on the period starting with the reforms of the late Qing dynasty and ending with the reform and opening-up of the People's Republic under Deng Xiaoping. 
Compulsory study of a subject of this nature and scope - in either English or Chinese - would not only help to rid local students of their ignorance regarding modern Chinese history, it would also strengthen their sense of national identity and understanding of their roots. And yet, as an established discipline that emphasizes independent thought and respect for truth, history is free from all the perceived baggage of the Moral and National Education. As a result the long-term benefits of compulsory Modern Chinese History in Hong Kong schools would perhaps be far greater than those of MNE, not only in building national identity but also in promoting local harmony. 




(HK Edition 06/04/2015 page11)

