
Myanmar opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi, is embarking on a groundbreaking visit to China - something which was unthinkable a decade ago. 
Long-hailed by the West as a fearless democracy campaigner, Suu Kyi's first-ever tour in China is actually sending two strong political signals to the outside world. First, that she was officially invited by the Communist Party of China (CPC). This is much more than a gesture of openness and frankness. It reflects Beijing's transformation from a once ideological to a more pragmatic approach to diplomacy. Second, it shows Suu Kyi has been able to adapt her role from idealized democracy symbol to a can-do politician. 
Amid pessimism over the prospect of constitutional reform, this dramatic news - at first glance - seems irrelevant to Hong Kong. But it should in fact serve as a timely reminder for local opposition leaders: Times are changing, and they should move with the times. 
Suu Kyi has many insights that Hong Kong's opposition should pay attention to. For instance, how to break a political stalemate? Suu Kyi has the answer from her own experience: "If you want to bring an end to long-standing conflict, you have to be prepared to compromise". 
Indeed, politics is meant to be the art of the possible in a spirit of give-and-take. There may be certain aspects of the SAR government's electoral reform package that the opposition - radical or moderate factions - don't approve of. However, with a view to the long-term interests of society, the opposition leaders, especially those lawmakers whose voting rights could shape the city's democratic future, should let reason prevail. 
Is there a universal standard that fits all when it comes to democracy? A bunch of activists still stubbornly insist there must be one. Think about this: Once asked by the Western media what democratic model Myanmar could look to, Suu Kyi - one of the world's most staunch democracy campaigners - replied by citing Asian, eastern European and Latin American countries' experiences, "We wish to learn from everybody who has achieved a transition to democracy, we can also learn which mistakes we should avoid." She also said that a parody of democracy could be more dangerous than a blatant dictatorship, because this gives people an opportunity to avoid doing anything. 
Pragmatic and rational, Suu Kyi may face criticism wherever she goes and whatever she says. A Western media outlet has recently said, "Her halo has slipped among foreign human-rights lobbyists." But it is good that political figures with vision and insight care more about doing things - rather than just chanting slogans. 




(HK Edition 06/12/2015 page11)

