


      Ambrose Lau says the electoral reform proposal is a positive response to challenges facing Hong Kong and has strong support from the public
      
        The SAR government presented its constitutional reform proposal to the Legislative Council (LegCo) last Wednesday. The reform package is a positive answer to strong public demand for universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive (CE) election. It will be the greatest step forward for Hong Kong's democratic development - once it is approved by LegCo.
        
          At this historic moment, Hong Kong people expect LegCo members to heed the popular wishes and pass the constitutional reform package. This will show they are responsible representatives and committed to promoting democratic development.
          
            All LegCo members should honor mainstream popular desires for implementing universal suffrage in the 2017 CE election. If opposition lawmakers insist on vetoing the electoral reform package they are denying 5 million voters the opportunity to elect the next CE by universal suffrage. But they are also giving them a reason to shut opposition politicians out of LegCo in future elections.
            
              Achieving universal suffrage in CE election is a solemn promise the central government made after resuming sovereignty over Hong Kong. This is enshrined in the Basic Law along with relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC). It is natural for Hong Kong residents to look forward to this great day in the city's democratic development. The SAR government has responded positively to public aspirations. This took into account the constitutional principles and democratic elements required by such a political undertaking. It is clearly legitimate, sensible and reasonable. It deserves the support of all LegCo members as well as local residents.
              
                The proposal fully complies with the principles for implementing universal suffrage in the next CE election. This was outlined in the landmark decision by the NPCSC announced on Aug 31 last year as well as with the Basic Law regarding the design of Hong Kong's political system. It is what Hong Kong residents want. It is another milestone in the city's democratic progress. Vetoing the reform package will delay Hong Kong's democratic development for years.
                
                  The "One Country, Two Systems" principle is an unprecedented constitutional arrangement tailor-made for China's sovereign rule over the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macao. It is the basis for maintaining the existing social system of the two cities and advancing to full democracy in a gradual, orderly fashion. Now Hong Kong has the opportunity to achieve universal suffrage as early as 2017, thanks to this unique and innovative concept. This means Hong Kong may achieve universal suffrage just 20 years after the handover, much sooner than the United Kingdom (150 years), France (185 years) and the United States (184 years).
                  
                    The brief history of Hong Kong's democratic development shows the central government has always been committed to implementing universal suffrage in the SAR. Under British rule, Hong Kong people never enjoyed democratic rights. The governors and principal officials were all appointed by the British government. The Sino-UK Joint Declaration on the issue of Hong Kong only says "the Chief Executive will be returned through election or consultation". It is the central government that put implementation of universal suffrage in both CE and legislative elections in the Basic Law. The NPCSC decided in 2007 that Hong Kong may elect the CE by universal suffrage in 2017 and added it in the Basic Law as an appendix. Last year, the Aug 31 framework decision of the NPCSC specified the method of selecting the CE by universal suffrage in 2017. The SAR government's constitutional reform proposal, based on the framework decision of the NPCSC, will mark another milestone in the exercise of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle once it is approved by the LegCo.
                    
                      CE Leung Chun-ying said last week it was unrealistic and futile to demand the withdrawal or amendment of the Aug 31 framework decision of the NPCSC because the constitutional authority of the central government cannot be challenged. The Basic Law and NPCSC decisions must be respected and observed unconditionally. The opposition parties should abandon their dream of forcing the central government to withdraw or change the framework decision of the NPCSC in their favor. This is because there is no way Beijing will ever give in on such unconstitutional demands.
                      
                        Most public opinion polls conducted since the constitutional reform began showed majority support for achieving universal suffrage in the 2017 CE election according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC. The opposition camp should honor the wishes of Hong Kong people by approving the SAR government's electoral reform proposals.
                        
                          The author is a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference Standing Committee.
                          
(China Daily 04/28/2015 page10)

