
It has been 18 years since the handover. While economic cooperation between Hong Kong and the mainland continues to grow, and has benefited companies and people on both sides, the ideological gap is expanding. Personally, what I'm concerned about the most since 1997 are the defects in our education system. 
In recent years, most of Hong Kong's social issues have arisen from problems associated with the younger generation. The illegal "Occupy Central" movement, with students as its backbone, is the most cogent evidence for such an assertion. While the HKSAR's legislature was preparing to vote on the crucial constitutional reform bill some two weeks ago, 10 people were detained on suspicion of plotting bomb attacks to derail the democratic process. Most of those arrested are young people, some of whom are members of a radical group calling itself the "National Independent Party". 
While most Hong Kong people are shocked by the campaigns launched by these young people, I've pondered over these issues over and over again. I realize that Hong Kong's education system is defective in some aspects. These systematic defects are the root cause of the behavior of many young people who have been led astray. 
It's because of the lack of patriotic education that some of our young people have the illusion of viewing Hong Kong as an independent political entity. It is because of the lack of legal consciousness that many young students got involved in the "Occupy" protests. It is because of the lack of knowledge of the Basic Law that many of them opposed the government's constitutional reform proposals, which were formulated in strict accordance with the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee. 
Hong Kong people always respect the rule of law, and the city is reputed for its good public security. Many residents take pride in this. While it is right to promote democracy in the SAR, I do believe that any such move should be based on respect for others. Everyone has the freedom to express his or her views, but this should be conducted in a civilized and legal manner, without jeopardizing the freedom and basic rights of others. If democracy is pursued at the price of violence, illegality and even the safety of others, democracy will be meaningless. 
We need to educate our descendants on this. More importantly, we need to educate them on the real meaning of country and patriotism. That Hong Kong is an integral part of China is beyond question, so the idea of "love the country and Hong Kong" should be embedded in our minds. This is the most fundamental concept a worthy citizen should have. 
It's a pity that the government's proposed electoral reform for the election of the Chief Executive by universal suffrage fell through in the Legislative Council last month. Otherwise, Hong Kong would have much more to celebrate on its 18th handover anniversary. 
As we enter the 19th post-handover year, Hong Kong has to move on. First of all, we should continue to find ways to boost our economy and maintain the good practice of relentlessly enhancing the overall well-being of society. The SAR government should also attach greater importance to education. 
I suggest that the Education Bureau consider adding the Basic Law and patriotic education to the school curriculum, including the background of the drafting and legislation of the city's mini-constitution and the reason for maintaining "One Country, Two Systems", as well as Hong Kong's history before the handover. This would promote students' understanding of our country and Hong Kong, and to give them a sense of national identity. 
Equipped with historical facts through appropriate education, students will be able to make independent and critical judgments if attempts are made to mislead them. This would greatly reduce the chances of absurdities like the "Occupy" movement recurring. 




(HK Edition 07/02/2015 page10)

