
Zhou Bajun says the city's twin goals should be to transform the economy by becoming a trailblazer for 'Belt and Road' initiative and improve social harmony through reform 
The Central Committee of the Communist Party of China says in its proposals on the promulgation of the 13th Five-Year Plan (2016-20) the mainland intends to deepen cooperation with the regions of Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan in socio-economic development; implement fully and accurately the "One Country, Two Systems" policy and "Hong Kong people governing Hong Kong" or "Macao people governing Macao" principle and a high degree of autonomy; help Hong Kong and Macao utilize their unique strengths; elevate the two special administrative regions' place and roles in the nation's economic development and opening-up to the outside world; and support Hong Kong and Macao in their own efforts to boost economic development, improve people's well-being, advance democracy and enhance social harmony. It is safe to say these are the goals the central government has set for the Hong Kong SAR in the next five years. 
The economic integration of Hong Kong and the mainland has picked up pace since the Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement (CEPA) between Hong Kong and the mainland was signed and took effect in 2003. So far it has achieved overall liberalization of the consumer goods trade and is now working on free trade of services. However, Hong Kong has seen the emergence of some forms of anti-integration sentiment in certain corners of local society since 2011. Some radical groups inspired by such ideas were formed to advocate "anti-Sinofication" and even "Hong Kong independence". These separatist groups have managed to disrupt public order with illegal protests that included physical harassment of innocent passersby they assumed were tourists from the mainland. Their unlawful behavior is widely viewed as one of the reasons why the number of mainland residents coming to Hong Kong has shrunk dramatically in recent months. Many believe that in a way they contributed to the slowdown of the retail and tourism-related sectors. 
Meanwhile, Hong Kong's financial market is becoming increasingly dependent on the mainland economy and is now looking forward to the launch of the Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect after the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect started earlier this year. Both are cross-boundary stock trading schemes designed to boost securities trading volume here and on the mainland. In Hong Kong people are still divided over how the economic integration with the mainland should be expanded and the conflicting ideas can be described largely as "pro-acceleration" and "pro-caution". However, more and more people have come to agree that full economic integration of Hong Kong and the mainland is inevitable. As such the SAR government should ride this historic tide and seek central government support in upgrading the CEPA to facilitate broader and deeper economic integration in the 13th Five-Year Plan period. 
Another crucial issue the HKSAR Government and local society must address in the 13th Five-Year Plan period is elevating Hong Kong's place and role in the nation's economic development and its efforts in opening to the outside world. 
That Hong Kong can and should act as a "super-connector" in the nation's "Belt and Road" strategic initiative, as proposed by Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying, is the official concept of Hong Kong's role and place in the nation's economic development and opening drive. It is similar to Hong Kong's role in the nation's economic reform since the late 1970s that focused on attracting foreign investment to the mainland. For more than 30 years Hong Kong was the most important bridge between the mainland and the outside world. But that role is beginning to lose its shine, as some major cities on the mainland are now seen as China's "windows" on the world. Still, Hong Kong is undoubtedly a "super-connector" compared with those major mainland cities. 
That said, in addition to everything Hong Kong has contributed to the nation's economic development so far, the SAR can and should do more than just be a "super-connector" in the implementation of the "Belt and Road" strategy. It should also be a "trailblazer", because Hong Kong and Hong Kong-based businesses boast more international experience and knowledge than mainland cities and their businesses. As a part of China and a leading financial center in Asia, Hong Kong has every reason to serve as a trailblazer in implementing the "Belt and Road" strategy. The city has what it takes to play a major role in financial matters, particularly in the operations of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) as a member or partner. Personally I believe Hong Kong should join the AIIB as soon as possible. At the very least the SAR government should utilize Hong Kong's financial market to channel free-flowing capital to AIIB-funded development projects and encourage local talents in this field to work for or advise such undertakings. 
The central government's expectations for the HKSAR can be summed up as "developing the economy, improving people's livelihood, advancing democracy and enhancing social harmony". Unfortunately Hong Kong has not been as successful as local society would like in this regard over the past 18 years. For the next five years it should focus on basically completing the structural transformation of its economy as well as enacting social welfare reform. These efforts are vital to achieving democratic advancement and social harmony. 




(HK Edition 11/11/2015 page9)

