
Zhou Bajun writes that the SAR has an important role in helping the mainland and other regions develop better understanding and encourage closer relations 
Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying made some important points in his speech at a reception held by the SAR government to celebrate the 66th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China on Oct 1. Leung said Hong Kong can facilitate the country's development by maximizing its own strengths and boosting exchanges with people around the world. He said Hong Kong could develop relations with other societies, raise its international profile and play a positive role in the "Belt and Road" initiative. 
These are worthy ideas - but there is a question: Hong Kong has developed great strengths over the years - including Chinese-English bilingual proficiency. But what is holding it back from fully utilizing these strengths? Hong Kong must overcome any obstacles which are preventing it from making the most of these strengths. 
Chen Zuo'er, president of the Chinese Association of Hong Kong and Macao Studies, said in his speech at a symposium held in Hong Kong on Sept 20, "The advantages that Hong Kong enjoyed in its development over the years are still there, but advantages are not synonymous with superiority." This means, the sense of superiority some Hong Kong people flaunt is one of the obstacles preventing the city from fully utilizing its strengths. 
Yet there is a danger greater than arrogance - the cultural differences between the East and West. According to Leung's proposition, Hong Kong is bound to encounter "cultural clashes" when it proceeds to "increase popular exchanges with other peoples and enhance its relations with societies around the world". The so-called clash of civilizations will surely materialize when different cultures encounter each other. To "build mutual understanding among different peoples" we must ensure Eastern and Western cultures "converge without clashes". 
In the first 30 years of China's reforms and liberalization, its exchanges with the rest of the world were mainly material and technological. Generally, ideological and cultural exchanges remained superficial. During this period, Hong Kong played the role of being a "bridge" between the mainland and the outside world for things like capital, commodities and services. These had few ideological overtones.. 
Today, China has become the second-largest economy in the world - with the total value of foreign trade reaching No 1 in recent years. During this time, the global economic, financial and political situation also underwent a period of profound adjustment. The global economic center of gravity began shifting from the West to the East. Exchanges between China and Western countries grew in scope as well as depth. With the continued flow of goods, services and capital between China and the outside world, clashes between ideologies and cultures also developed. 
Financial Times columnist Gideon Rachman wrote in a recent commentary on Sino-US relations that huge ideological and cultural differences exist between the two nations. He quoted a US official present at the multiple Sino-US summits. This official said in private that the US and Chinese presidents do not know how to talk to each other. They are like two computers running entirely different operating systems. Rachman said Americans believe in such universal values as freedom and democracy and think they should be accepted around the world - in an ideal world. The Chinese, on the other hand, believe that what benefits China may not necessarily benefit the rest of the world and vice versa. Guided by these contrasting beliefs, the two countries have taken vastly different measures in response to international conflicts and sensitive issues such as human rights. Rachman also said the Chinese and Americans hold very different concepts on national/ethnic, civic and immigration issues. 
Hong Kong, once it became a British colony, accepted and kept a set of "core values" imported from the West. Today, Hong Kong society still believes these Western values are universal. It adheres to Western views on national/ethnic, civic and ideological issues. However, as exchanges between the mainland and Western countries have increased in recent years Hong Kong's role is no longer simply as an intermediary. Exchanges of goods, services and capital through Hong Kong - the two-way bridge - used to be smooth in the past. But they may not be so today due to ideological and cultural clashes between the East and West. 
That is why Hong Kong must promote the peaceful coexistence of Eastern and Western cultures. It must help prevent them from clashing with each other. Only by doing this can Hong Kong expand exchanges among all societies. This will boost the SAR's relations with other places and encourage mutual understanding between the people as the city proceeds with the "Belt and Road" strategy. 
The SAR government also needs to encourage society to abandon stereotyping and prejudices between Western and Chinese ideologies and cultures. Hong Kong is part of the Chinese nation. It should, in addition to being a "super connector", be a disseminator of objective information about the nation's development. 




(HK Edition 10/07/2015 page6)

