


      Chief Executive (CE) Leung Chun-ying last week presented his third Policy Address to the Legislative Council (LegCo) since taking office in 2012. Under the title "Uphold the Rule of Law, Seize the Opportunities, Make the Right Choices, Pursue Democracy, Boost the Economy, Improve People's Livelihood", the 2015 Policy Address begins by drawing attention to destructive attempts by certain political parties to derail Hong Kong's constitutional development based on the Basic Law - as shown through the illegal "Occupy Central" movement.
      
        It goes on to emphasize that based on the "One Country, Two Systems" policy, Hong Kong exercises a "high degree of autonomy", but not "absolute autonomy". Democracy must develop under the rule of law. The implementation of universal suffrage must comply with the Basic Law and relevant decisions by the National People's Congress Standing Committee, the country's top legislature.
        
          Leung says in the Policy Address that 2015 will be a critical year for Hong Kong's constitutional development. To achieve universal suffrage people must seek consensus by putting aside their differences. Hong Kong must not tolerate unlawful behavior.
          
            Constitutional reform is one of the city's top priorities. It is only natural for the SAR government to reiterate its stance on this. It also has to point out the fallacies of such unconstitutional demands and illegal means to achieve them in the Policy Address. That is why Leung mentioned the Undergrad magazine by name. He then attacked a series of articles in the official publication of the Hong Kong University Students' Union. In recent years, the magazine has advocated "Hong Kong independence". It is the CE's responsibility to warn the public against such dangerous ideas. Those who accuse him of "suppressing freedom of expression and academic discussion" are trying to hide the truth.
            
              Leung said: "The 2014 February issue of Undergrad featured a cover story entitled 'Hong Kong people deciding their own fate'. In 2013, a book called Hong Kong Nationalism was published by Undergrad. It argues that Hong Kong should find a way to achieve self-reliance and self-determination. Undergrad and other students, including student leaders of the 'Occupy' movement, have misstated some facts. We must stay alert."
              
                Leung explained after the Policy Address that some people believe "Hong Kong independence" ideas are just random thoughts and should be ignored. I disagree. This issue concerns Hong Kong's constitutional status and deserves public attention. Some people thought the same way about "Occupy Central" when its advocates began preaching their unconstitutional views in 2013. But they then realized they had grossly underestimated those people after "Occupy" did considerable damage last year.
                
                  "Hong Kong independence" ideas did not attract much attention when they emerged a few years ago. But recently they have been attracting attention. There is little doubt what their proponents are doing if one reads the articles in Undergrad. Their subversive ideas are so obvious no responsible government can ignore them. If such dangerous ideas spread then Hong Kong's security, rule of law, prosperity and stability will be jeopardized. "Hong Kong independence" warrants the kind of preventive measures we have come to expect against deadly epidemics like bird flu. No effort should be spared to eradicate it.
                  
                    The author is a veteran journalist based in Hong Kong.
                    
(HK Edition 01/21/2015 page9)

