







 
A flag flies at half-mast at the Singapore Embassy in Beijing on Monday. Wang Jing / China Daily
Singapore's Ministry of Education said on Monday afternoon that flags at schools flew at half-staff starting in the morning, as a mark of respect to Lee Kuan Yew. 
Schools also observed a minute's silence during Monday morning's assembly. 
On Tuesday, school leaders are scheduled to address students and staff during assemblies and reflect on Lee's life and legacy. 
School leaders will refer to Education Minister Heng Swee Keat's message to the MOE community. 
Teachers, staff and students from government schools and postsecondary educational institutions, and MOE headquarters staff, will participate in state events such as the Lying-in-State, Special Parliament Sitting and the State Funeral Service. 
Singapore's flag was flown at half-staff at the country's mission in the Philippines, where staff wore black armbands to mark Lee's death. 
Dozens of Singaporeans, diplomats, businessmen and bankers made their way to the embassy to sign a condolence book inside a small room furnished with just a table, a chair, flowers in two vases and a portrait of Lee. 
"It's a very sad day for all of us, for all Singaporeans. He was a great statesman, father, who made us so proud, who brought us from where we were to where we are now. Because of him, we are very proud to be Singaporeans," said Sylvia Tay, the Singaporean wife of Belgium's Ambassador to the Philippines Roland van Remoortele. 
Tay was among the first to sign the condolence book. 
"People will remember him as somebody who was very focused, who has never been swayed by whatever influences are around him," she said. 
Rolf Gerber, chairman of the Singapore International Chamber of Commerce, was in the Philippines for a meeting and visited the embassy. 
He said Singapore will carry on Lee's "will to make Singapore even more prosperous". 
"The Singapore he leaves today is so different from 50 years ago, and it is only this man who achieved that. That's the legacy of Mr Lee Kuan Yew, whom we will dearly miss," Gerber said. 
Filipino industrialist Washington Sycip, a close friend of the Lee family and Singapore President Tony Tan Keng Yam, also came to offer his condolences. 
He said Lee's "loss is not only to Singapore but to all of us who admired what he was able to do, with Asian values". 
"Like him, I was firmly convinced that Western democracy for a poor nation doesn't work, and he proved it in such a remarkable way, as no other country has had the benefit of his wisdom," Sycip said. 
Singapore Philippine Association head Peter Tay said Lee's "transformative role and leadership in making Singapore the innovation capital that we all know today is immeasurable". 
"Mr Lee's presence will be clearly missed," Tay said. 
The Straits Times and China Daily are members of Asia News Network. 
(China Daily USA 03/24/2015 page3)

 
 
