
Chan Tak-leung writes that while Hong Kong has experienced difficult times recently, 2016 can be a great year if more people cooperate and act positively 
As 2015 is drawing to a close very soon, I believe it is timely for all the key players in Hong Kong to reflect on events which took place during the last 12 months in the Hong Kong Special Administration Region and draw their own conclusions on what roles they can play. This is to deliver the vision of making the SAR a vibrant, confident and harmonious global city which serves the best interests of its citizens. 
For any individual, it is unavoidable that there are ups and downs along life's journey. One hopes that through such reflection, all the leaders responsible for the executive, legislative and judicial functions of the SAR, together with stakeholders in the public, private and voluntary sectors as well as the local populace, will come to an understanding that it is time for the SAR to move forward in unison to achieve what the city deserves. 
For Hong Kong, 2015 started off with the clearing of blockades formed as a result of the 79-day illegal occupation of Central and other areas. The dispute caused by the denial of a visit by British parliamentarians of the Foreign Affairs Committee had subsided, and Hong Kong was once again immersed in the hotly debated proposal for changes to deliver universal suffrage in the election of the SAR's next Chief Executive. 
After the Legislative Council failed to agree on the proposal, the politicization of everything and anything became the norm. LegCo became the eye of the storm in the second half of the year as filibustering persisted over the long-awaited Innovation and Technology Bureau, which was finally voted through after much delay. Toward the later part of the year, debates over the Territory-wide System Assessment and the Copyright (Amendment) Bill 2014, among other things, dominated LegCo proceedings, as well as wasting valuable time in the chamber. 
Elsewhere in Hong Kong citizens were troubled by unfriendly activities targeting cross-border shoppers, while lead was found in water both in residential and other public buildings, causing much concern and unease for residents and parents. A small group of fanatics booed when the national anthem was played at World Cup qualifying matches between the Hong Kong and national teams, which resulted in a warning and a fine imposed by FIFA. Downturns in the SAR's retail and tourism sectors were also bad news stories. 
Then there was the ongoing debacle centered on the appointment of a pro-vice-chancellor by the University of Hong Kong Council - and the fact that students in other higher education institutions were more interested in promoting "democracy" on their campuses rather than academic excellence. Their lack of respect for the governance of these institutions was regrettable, and might ultimately affect the city's progress on the global stage. 
Among the few positive developments for the SAR in 2015 were the share connects between Hong Kong, Shanghai and Shenzhen, with Hong Kong acting as a transaction center for renminbi and taking a role in funds' arrangements with the mainland, showing that Hong Kong remains a crucial financial and economic hub for the nation, the rest of Asia and the world. Despite its problems, it is remarkable that Hong Kong is still being recognized as the best city in the world when it comes to offering the most economic freedom for doing business. 
Hong Kong's global financial status was on display when Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying suggested that the SAR has the capability to play a key role as "super-connector" in the Belt and Road Initiative as well as the establishment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. 
In 2015, the theme for the CE's Policy Address was "Rule of Law, Seize the Opportunities and Make the Right Choices", with democracy, the economy and improving livelihoods as his major themes. The 2016 Policy Address and Budget are now under consultation. It is paramount that all stakeholders in Hong Kong contribute to this consultation with the best interests of its citizens at heart. 
What is needed now is for all concerned to put aside their self-interest and prejudices in order to take a rational and balanced approach when making judgments. They need to consider the important issues affecting the livelihoods of millions of citizens in the SAR such as housing, employment, welfare, health and education - to name but a few. 
The challenges facing Hong Kong are many. But if its citizens can share the same vision, are willing to work together and to reaffirm their commitment to making a real difference for the betterment of Hong Kong, then its goals, though ambitious, are achievable. With 2015 nearly behind us, it is time to think and act positively for the future. This will make Hong Kong a better place in which to live, work, invest, learn, do business and retire. Then we can enjoy the rewards that only a city at ease with itself can bring. 




(HK Edition 12/31/2015 page12)

