


      Another whistleblower has stepped out from the shadows to reveal more shocking details about donations for the illegal "Occupy Central" protest. The latest revelations over the "Occupy" trio's fundraising activities inevitably reinforce the need for a thorough inquiry into these hidden practices.
      
        According to the latest batch of revelations, Chan Kin-man, a key instigator of the "Occupy" campaign, purposely released "woebegone bank account balances" in August and October 2013. This was in an obvious attempt to garner public sympathy and solicit more money from ordinary citizens. The intriguing thing is, he and his comrades had already secured huge donations from "a member of the public" and other shadowy foreign donors at the time.
        
          Common sense suggests that without multi-million dollar sums in financial support, a protest movement on the scale of "Occupy" could not have dragged on for nearly three months.
          
            The whistleblower, like many other participants, was constantly kept in the dark about the occupation movement's hidden political agenda. They participated in the protest in support of the trio's claim to be "promoting democracy". However, to the great disappointment of their supporters, the "Occupy" trio failed to honor their promises. As the "Occupy" protest unfolded, the opposition camp became divided into rival groups. The trio was taking orders from a bunch of "big lenders" and inevitably betrayed their naive followers. Gone was the promise of "peace and love".
            
              Nine months after "Occupy" ended, some shocking revelations have been emerging. This is all due to whistleblowers who refuse to remain silent. But an increasing number of questions still remain. They will not disappear without convincing answers: Who are the donors and those receiving donations? How much money was involved? How did the masterminds divide the money? Where is the remaining money? Has any of it been embezzled?
              
                To decipher all this would not be too difficult. But only if the "Occupy" trio, who led the protesters, took the initiative and released their long-promised audit report.
                
                  These new revelations once again offer us a timely reminder. The "Occupy" movement, which involved foreign forces, not only damaged the rule of law, but also posed a severe threat to national security. National security might be undermined further if certain loopholes, such as a lack of relevant laws in the SAR, are not plugged in future.
                  
(HK Edition 08/25/2015 page9)

