


      Tim Collard hopes HK can overcome its fears about an imperfect democracy and seize a unique opportunity to have an election by universal suffrage
      
        Everybody's talking about democracy at the moment - here in Britain we've been doing democracy. Whatever you may feel about its advantages or drawbacks, let me tell you that it isn't a comfortable process.
        
          We have just had an election in which until the very last moment it looked as if we would get a change of government: But, in the privacy of the ballot box, the electorate seems to have balked, gulped, and decided to opt for no change after all. The result was a shock to everyone: The Labour opposition, several days later, is still traumatized (OK, I'll admit that this includes me!); and even some of the victorious Conservatives have been looking a bit shaken at their unexpected victory. The country is still recovering, and the process will probably take months at least.
          
            So it is a delusion to think that a democracy means that we can all vote for what we want and get what we want. There are winners and losers. More importantly, there are constraints on what democracy can achieve. All this is the stuff of contemporary discussion and debate in Hong Kong, a mature, educated and civilized society contemplating democracy for the first time.
            
              After much preparation and deliberation, the Hong Kong government and the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) have proposed a bold step forward within the framework of the Basic Law - the election of a Chief Executive under universal suffrage. The point of contention here is that, under these proposals, it is only the active franchise (those in the society permitted to vote) which is completely free; the passive franchise (those permitted to stand for election) is subject to certain restrictions. Some Hong Kong people say this doesn't equate to "true universal suffrage", and is therefore imperfect; others say that free active suffrage is the really important point, and that it should not be endangered by blind rejectionism. Half a loaf is better than no bread.
              
                First of all, in our hearts we all know that nothing is ever perfect in this world, and there are many good, though imperfect things, which should not be rejected because of their imperfections. Secondly, let us consider the world's other democracies. Britain and the US pride themselves on their democratic traditions: Both countries have a fully free active franchise, but how free is the passive franchise really in any country? We have just had a free election in Britain, but we are still constrained by the grim realities of the global economy, and in practice this limits for whom or what we can vote. Ultimately the figures have to add up. It is argued - I think correctly - that the Labour Party's last-minute defeat was caused by a fear that the party's attractive but expensive policies might in practice damage Britain's economy and global competitiveness, and thus voters backed away from ideas which they had liked.
                
                  And in the US the passive franchise is still more tightly restricted, simply by the vast amounts of money one needs to become a candidate for office. In some countries leading politicians become millionaires (largely through corruption). In the US you have to be a millionaire to start with before you have any chance of becoming a leading politician. Is that real freedom of passive suffrage? No. Does it make the US totally undemocratic? No.
                  
                    We all know what Hong Kong's real-world constraints are: The territory falls under the sovereignty of the People's Republic of China, de jure and de facto, and that is simply a non-negotiable fact like the global economy. But we are all in the same boat, though the precise nature of the constraints is entirely different.
                    
                      I hope Hong Kong can overcome its fears about an imperfect democracy, and seize universal active franchise with both hands. All democracies are imperfect. As I said above, democracy can be uncomfortable and exhausting, but we would not like our friends in Hong Kong to miss out on the experience. But fasten your seat-belts for a bumpy ride!
                      
                        And these British/Hong Kong parallels have a neat little coda. In Scotland - where I live - the voters have roundly rejected both Conservative and Labour parties, and awarded a landslide victory to the Scottish Nationalist Party (SNP). Following last September's failed referendum on independence, the SNP has dropped separatism and campaigned successfully on a platform of a high degree of autonomy - sound familiar? Following the election result - in which David Cameron's governing party obtained one seat, and the Labour opposition another one, against 56 for the SNP - Scotland is well placed to negotiate that high degree of autonomy. This would be a radical new development, and perhaps we should choose a new name for it. How about "One Country, Two Systems"? Is that name trademarked?
                        
                          The author is a former UK diplomat specializing in China. He spent nine years as an analyst in Beijing. He now works as a freelance writer and commentator.
                          
(HK Edition 05/14/2015 page11)

