The date for Legislative Council members to cast votes on the government's electoral reform proposals unveiled on April 22 for electing Chief Executive in 2017 is drawing closer. The Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong (DAB) announced the latest poll results on May 25, showing that 62 percent of the Hong Kong people surveyed supported the reforms, while 32 percent opposed it. Given a support rate of over 60 percent, it is not surprising that the central government would stick to its framework decided last August - in which the CE candidates must be nominated by the 1,200-strong Nominating Committee and supported by half of them before going to the final public vote, whereas the opposition legislators are still determined to block the passage of this reform package. Hong Kong seems to be deadlocked in a political stalemate. 
Since last September, the political atmosphere in the city can only be described as confrontational and uncompromising, dividing our society and families, and slowing down economic growth. Our government has consequently been distracted from dealing with pressing livelihood and economic issues. 
Meanwhile, more resources were diverted to expand our police force in readiness to deal with social chaos that might arise in a repeat of last year's "Occupy Central" protests following LegCo's vote on the reform package. At this critical juncture, we must ask: Is Hong Kong too entangled over the mechanism for producing the CE candidates and forgetting the true purpose of democracy? Nevertheless, it is never too late to pursue meaningful enforcement of true "democracy".
More than 2,500 years ago, Confucius - revered Chinese sage and philosopher of the Spring and Autumn period, and Plato - Greek philosopher and earliest political thinker in the development of the Western concept of "democracy", advocated for the election of "virtuous and worthy people" to become political leaders. Centuries later, US president Abraham Lincoln also emphasized that "government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the Earth." In other words, some of our most respected historic political thinkers advocated the election of virtuous and competent individuals to form and head governments in service of the people. 
Therefore, regardless of whether the current Hong Kong reform blueprint meets the procedural expectations of the "pan-democrats", the main issue in this real world is whether the elected CE is competent and works for the people. And if the answer is "no", what can we do to minimize the damage caused by an unsuitable CE to our society?
We must not forget that Adolf Hitler rose to power in Germany in the early 1930s by gathering enough electoral support for the Nazis to become the largest political party in the Reichstag. 
And in the US, it takes on average $1.4 million for a candidate to get elected as a congressman, around $10 million as a senator, and at least a billion US dollars to run a successful campaign for the White House. Do we really want a democracy decided by the financial resources of candidates as in the US who would become beholden to their rich patrons, or by some populist politicians with their eyes only on short-term gains, at the expense of the society's long-term interest?
If the answer is "no", then it is clear that it requires more than "one person, one vote", or even the so-called "genuine democracy" the "pan-democrats" crave for, to guarantee a government which is fair in the treatment of its citizens. Hong Kong must have some assessment measures or institutions in place to protect its citizens' interests and ensure its long-term stability and prosperity. 
Here, an Assessment Council (AC) is proposed to oversee an annual evaluation of the performance of the incumbent CE as follows: All AC members would be required to evaluate the CE's performance annually. On a 1-10 scale, an averaged score under 5 would indicate under-performance. If the CE receives scores under 5 for three consecutive years, he/she must step down at the end of the third-year term, and the central government should then appoint an interim CE to lead the government until the next CE election.
Spending a large amount of money would not be needed in the whole exercise which will be supervised by our much vaunted Independent Commission Against Corruption and other respected public figures. Hong Kong people would thus be empowered through the election of AC members.
Who will be the AC members? First of all, they should be impartial and not overlap with the 1200-strong Nominating Committee (NC) members. How many are needed to do the job? Will they be appointed or elected? Will they also represent the same four sectors - business, professional, social and political - and the 38 subsectors just like the NC? Or will they include new sectors? How long is their term? How well will they be paid to avoid corruption? 
These are creative ideas for our lawmakers to discuss seriously whether they want to have a true democracy for Hong Kong. They also offer an opportunity for them to inject constructive suggestions to take this AC proposal forward.



(HK Edition 06/08/2015 page8)
