


      Chan Tak-leung believes members of Hong Kong's LegCo need to follow stricter rules of conduct and behavior like those required of politicians in leading democracies
      
        It is surprising to see that while opposition members of Hong Kong's Legislative Council constantly voice their support for democracy and "real universal suffrage" they do not want to subject themselves to a Code of Ethics or a Code of Conduct such as those adopted by legislatures around the world.
        
          On the one hand they demand "international standards" in the nomination of candidates for the election of the next Chief Executive, yet they believe they don't need to meet "international standards" in their behavior. I can understand their predicament, because if LegCo were to be run according to international standards, then this would certainly limit the opportunities for these people to disrupt LegCo in the name of "freedom and democracy".
          
            But when did you last see a turkey voting for Christmas? Do these legislators not feel ashamed to be addressed as "honorable" while acting less than honorably?
            
              The "Advisory Guidelines on Matters of Ethics" in relation to the conduct of members of LegCo has been in existence since 1996 and it is re-issued by the Committee on Members Interests (CMI) to all members at the beginning of each legislative term. However, it is only "advisory" in nature. Legislators have argued against improvements beyond this stage by claiming, "It is difficult to define what proper conduct means; proposed mechanisms might be abused; investigation alone might damage the members' public image; conduct already under public scrutiny and they (LegCo members) would be subject to public censure if they misbehaved themselves; and cynicism about certain members assuming roles of monitors."
              
                As a result of these objections and despite their "honorable" status, LegCo legislators are bound by neither a "code of conduct" nor a "code of ethics" which are common in parliament and local councils in Britain, the Senate and the House of Representatives in the United States and legislatures of most Commonwealth countries.
                
                  The general principle of conduct is quite straightforward. It covers selflessness, integrity, objectivity, accountability, openness, honesty and leadership.
                  
                    For the information of opposition members "proper conduct" means precisely that unless you act contrary to any of the above, you have nothing to be concerned about.
                    
                      In Britain's parliament, the twin approach of monitoring was adopted by a committee on standards run by members of parliament (MPs) and an independent parliamentary commissioner for standards. MPs, on taking the oath after their elections, would have "a duty to be faithful and bear true allegiance to HM the Queen according to law". Elected members are expected to behave with integrity including their use of public resources.
                      
                        I wonder what would happen to some opposition legislators if the same conduct were expected of them. They would certainly be severely reprimanded by the president if they used abusive language about the nation, in the chamber. They might also have been censured and investigated if they allowed activists to squat in their offices during the time of the illegal "Occupy Central" protests. .
                        
                          Furthermore, under House of Commons Standing Orders (SO), the speaker and I quote "shall have the power to select the amendments, new clauses or new schedules to the proposed bill or motion". If this particular SO were adopted by LegCo, filibustering would be consigned to history and lawmakers would not be able to hide behind their alleged "elected responsibilities to monitor the government" as they instead blocked and delayed the implementation of policies and delivery of services to the citizens who voted for them.
                          
                            In the US, Congress, with its two legislative chambers (Senate and the House of Representatives) has its respective ethics committees. Senators and representatives are represented in these committees and supported by professional staff. They provide oversight on acceptable official conduct in order to reflect creditability of the chambers. As a result, both elected senators and representatives are subject to the same operating rules which govern order, decorum and quorum at meetings together with absenteeism.
                            
                              If the opposition admires the US so much, then perhaps they should have a thorough re-think and take some of these operating rules into consideration. Take a quorum for example: Congress has the power to "compel the attendance of absent members". Members are also considered to be "chronic absentees" after five days of consecutive absence. They are consequently held in contempt of the house. How orderly businesses in LegCo would be if such rules were implemented - not only would the legislature proceed with ease but Hong Kong citizens would at last see value for money from their elected representatives.
                              
                                I do not believe Hong Kong voters can put more trust in their elected members unless they behave sensibly, both in and out of the chamber, subject themselves to appropriate scrutiny, honor their pledge to uphold the principle of "One Country, Two Systems" and the Basic Law, and work in the best interest of all citizens. Only by returning to an honorable role will they be able to contribute to making Hong Kong a better international city which enjoys universal suffrage.
                                
                                  The author is director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                                  
(HK Edition 06/01/2015 page1)

