


      Chan Tak-leung writes that HK people have worked very hard to make the city successful and don't deserve to be denied the right to vote by spiteful lawmakers
      
        During my recent visit to Hong Kong I was able to listen to local opinions and come to the conclusion that the 5 million eligible voters in Hong Kong should be allowed to exercise their democratic rights in electing their next Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017. Opposition legislators ought to seriously reflect on the potential damage Hong Kong may suffer politically, economically and socially, as a result of their intransigent decision to veto the proposed electoral changes. I believe they are doing it out of spite and dogmatic opposition to China's right to exercise sovereignty over Hong Kong under the "One Country, Two System" principle and the Basic Law.
        
          Over the years, before and after Hong Kong's return to China, it was these millions of citizens whose diligence, industriousness and determination made Hong Kong the successful global city it is today. It would be a disgrace if a handful of legislators deny the rights and aspirations of these citizens simply because their elected representatives are selfish and determined to let their anti-Beijing stance get in the way of allowing their electorates more democracy.
          
            They do not represent the best interests of the people who voted for them. They oppose the proposed changes simply because they dislike the central government.
            
              The saddest aspect of the debate on constitutional reform is to see the "pan-democratic" legislators and other activists conduct the five stages of the reform consultation process like a game of political football. They are treating politics as a franchise where only they can pronounce what is right for Hong Kong. They ignore public opinion and have threatened to use their vetoes when the Legislative Council decides on the proposed package. This is after much public consultation by the government.
              
                Their anti-Beijing position is vindictive and was definitely not in their manifestos when they were standing for election. They have chosen to challenge China's sovereign rights over Hong Kong in spite of established policies and a legislative framework for the governance of the SAR. Their non-cooperative behavior has already brought about serious conflicts and illegal activities. This has also hurt Hong Kong's international standing. Moreover, it has instilled a sense of disobedience and lawlessness among some young people. The recent burning of copies of the Basic Law is yet another example of this irresponsible attitude.
                
                  Some legislators are just dreaming if they think China is still politically like it was in the 1960s and 1970s. They are the ones who opposed the country regaining sovereignty of Hong Kong in 1997. Even worse, those misguided activists want to promote "localism". They have failed to move with the times. They cannot accept they are now living and working under the "One Country, Two Systems" policy.
                  
                    Hong Kong is not Scotland. It cannot act like Scotland, which is now putting pressure on the British government and demanding independence. Under the Basic Law, Hong Kong was granted the right to administer itself as a special administrative region of China. The concept of "One Country, Two Systems" is unique by definition, no matter what opposition legislators and activists say. They are wrong if they think their acts will change Hong Kong's status. All their scheming and treacherous behavior will be futile; after all no other countries have SARs.
                    
                      They need to change their ideas and recognize that China has resumed sovereignty over Hong Kong. They should also realize what will happen to people or organizations who solicit outside help to illegally pressure a sovereign state. Betraying your country is a serious offence. In most places around the world, these acts are considered criminal offences.
                      
                        Some "pan-democratic" legislators claim that meeting to discuss the proposed electoral changes is "fruitless" because there is nothing new on offer. The same applies to their position on this issue. Are they not the ones who constantly repeated their demands for "real universal suffrage", "public nominations" and objections to the National People's Congress Standing Committee's Aug 31 decision time and time again over the last 10 months?
                        
                          When interviewed, some "pan-democratic" legislators said past elections were being manipulated. But with universal suffrage, wouldn't it be more difficult to manipulate 5 million voters?
                          
                            Not everyone wants to be a politician or be outspoken - whether they live and work in Hong Kong or the United Kingdom. Nonetheless, these people who sacrificed their youth and energy to build Hong Kong and establish its enviable position in the world deserve the right to vote. They have played a key role in the SAR's success. They should not be ignored because of the stubbornness of a few.
                            
                              The author is director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                              
(HK Edition 06/10/2015 page12)

