
This is an open letter responding to your challenge to Mr Zhang Rongshun to provide concrete evidence of "certain powers" which are active in Hong Kong. While Zhang may not respond to your challenge, we will! 
On March 29, Zhang, vice-chairman of the Legislative Affairs Commission under the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) stated Hong Kong's status as a special administrative region was not meant to be a stage for "certain powers" to advocate independence. You have challenged Zhang to provide concrete evidence before making claims about the "certain powers" of which he spoke. 
You know the "certain powers" to which he refers is the United States government, because in 2009, members of the "pan-democrat" camp, including yourself, collaborated with agents of the US government to directly challenge the authority of the central government by triggering the de-facto "civil referendum" in January 2010. 
You wanted concrete evidence of the "certain powers" of which Zhang spoke. Here it is: 
At a secret meeting held on Nov 15, 2009, Belinda Winterbourne, the National Democratic Institute (NDI) program manager in Hong Kong conspired with legislators Cyd Ho Sau-lan, Gary Fan Kwok-wai and others to trigger the de-facto "civil referendum" which resulted in the resignation of five members of the Legislative Council (LegCo), including yourself in January 2010. The following are excerpts of what Belinda Winterbourne said at one point during the meeting: " how much time do we have let's say if we did want to conduct a civil referendum educate them why we are doing this " 
As you are aware, the NDI is funded by the US government, which makes it a "foreign political organization" under Section 2 of the Societies Ordinance (CAP 151). So Winterbourne's repeated use of the word "we" when discussing plans to trigger the "civil referendum" provides unequivocal and overwhelming evidence of a foreign political organization directly participating in the decision-making process of political parties in Hong Kong. In simple terms, at the invitation of your "pan-democrat" colleagues, the US government has infiltrated the LegCo in Hong Kong. 
There is also evidence of these discussions contained in 11 video segments of the meeting. All the participants in this meeting are easily identifiable, as is the subject of their discussion. But before you question where we obtained these videotapes, perhaps you should query the wisdom of your colleagues in posting them on YouTube! We have appended key excerpts from this meeting to this letter and also included graphics for your ease of reference. 
These are the "certain powers" to which Zhang refers and when you view the actions your colleagues and yourself in this conspiracy, you may now appreciate why the NPCSC laid down a restrictive framework in its Aug 31 decision regarding the nomination of Chief Executive (CE) candidates in the 2017 CE election. You and your colleagues complain that the Aug 31 decision will mean candidates critical of Beijing will not be able to run, when in reality, the decision has been made to preclude candidates nominated by your allies in Washington from being able to run. 
By collaborating with agents of the US government, you and your colleagues have cost Hong Kong its political future. This is possibly the biggest political betrayal in the history of Hong Kong, so now we offer you a challenge. 
If you and your colleagues have any sense of honor, and truly represent the best interests of Hong Kong, on behalf of the people of Hong Kong, we demand the resignations of you, Cyd Ho, Gary Fan, Leung Kwok-hung, Wong Yuk-man, Albert Chan Wai-yip and any other collaborators in the Nov 15 plot. 
Kevin Law, Hong Kong Democracy Watch 




(HK Edition 04/02/2015 page10)

