
Ancient Chinese ship's lost booties sparkle among Maldives' tourism trove, and the bounties of this archipelago look likely to swell with the Maritime Silk Road's revival, Matt Hodges discovers. 
Ancient relics plundered from Chinese vessels are turning up in the strangest of places, as luxury resorts literally dig deep into virgin territory in the Maldives, where Chinese tourists now make up one-third of the market. 
The Maldives lies along ancient Maritime Silk Road trading routes from Southeast China to East Africa and the Persian Gulf that date back 2,000 years. President Xi Jinping called for a revival of these shipping links to forge closer regional ties during a visit to the Maldives last year. 






 
Clockwise from top: The sunset view ocean villas overlook a stunning sandbar and are the best choice of accommodation at Loama Resort on Maamigili Island. Three Chinese girls from Wuhan are spending a year working at this immaculate new resort in the Maldives. Schoolkids at a neighboring island show off local arts and crafts, including how to make Maldivian noodles. A resort manager points to some of the antiques that may find their way into a cultural museum. Photos by Matt Hodges / China Daily
Loama Resort, which has an enviable monopoly on the Maamigili Island in remote Raa Atoll, is tapping into this narrative to further chase the Chinese dragon after Qing Dynasty (1644-1911) porcelain was unearthed during the early phases of its construction. 
"We think it may have been Dutch pirates in the 17th century, but we're still doing some guesswork in that area," says Umair Badheeu, the resort's culture and heritage manager. 
This tiny teardrop is Treasure Island with a twist: The pets play nice, the natives are friendly, and the "gold" is buried in the resort's lobby museum. The 40-odd Chinese relics add a new dimension to its impressive 300-piece collection. 
In addition to the idyllic views, its trump card is having the only resort-based museum of Maldivian culture outside of Male, as well as the country's first gallery of modern Maldivian art in a stunning overwater pavilion. 
The discovery of two ancient sunken baths made from sandstone, the island's bedrock, suggests a Buddhist temple once existed there. The resort is partnering with the Maldives National University to dig deeper. 
Maamigili translates from a local dialect of Dhivehi as "big island cabbage", but that didn't deter ancient kings from using it as their private playground. Tourists seem unfazed that the Maldivian word for islands is "dives". Clearly, they're not. 
Loama is one of 102 operating island resorts in a necklace of 26 major atolls comprising 1,192 splotches of turquoise, yellow and green south of India and Sri Lanka. 
The only downside is the $540 you must fork out for the return seaplane ride from Male, a 2-square-kilometer island that houses one-third of the Maldives' 350,000 people. It's a scenic, if sweaty ride. 
The Maldives is a strict Muslim nation where locals, but not tourists, can face prison terms if found consuming alcohol or pork. 
It is illegal for tourists to bring alcohol into the country, but fortunately Loama does a mean Long Island Ice Tea. You can't exchange yuan, or most other currencies, so bring dollars and credit cards. 
Chinese, excluding those from Taiwan, made up 30.2 percent of the 1.2 million tourists who visited the Maldives last year, up 9.6 percent from 2013. No one else even came close. Germans were second at 8.2 percent and British third. 
The country served as a colonial outpost of the British before it transitioned to a republic in 1968, and a renovated army barracks now caters to those on a shoestring on Addu Atoll's Gan Island. 
But who wants to be reminded of bombs and bullets when you can have your own subaquatic Garden of Eden? 
Book anything other than an ocean villa and you miss the point. It entails spending hours on the balcony watching baby sharks, mantas and parrot fish swim up to say hi before you dive in to roam like Disney's Nemo around a pristine 100-hectare lagoon and superb coral forest. Natural fish spas are also a buzz. 
Opt for a sunset-view ocean villa and watch the sky turn blood-orange from a choice of king-sized bed, balcony lounger, open-plan bathtub or mesh mattress suspended over the sea. 

Dolphins, turtles and rays abound in this atoll but whale sharks are less common as they prefer the stronger currents in southern Ari Atoll. 
"What can you see here? A 3-D Jackson Pollock painting with 50 shades of coral, caves and overhangs," says resident dive instructor Andrea Balin from Italy. 
Single travelers are on the rise, but the Maldives is still a dish best served for two. 
If you tire of the sunset dolphin cruises and night-fishing excursions, try climbing coconut trees on neighboring islands, learning how to make Maldivian noodles with local schoolchildren or staring at abandoned islands like Kandahulhudhoo, which somehow squeezed in 4,500 people before they were relocated. 
Political slogans emblazon the coral walls on islands like Makaurathu, just a 30-minute speedboat hop from Maamigili, highlighting how dictatorships gave way to democracy in the wake of a 2003 prison riot on Maafushi in Kaafu Atoll. The country had its first multiparty election in 2008. 
But you will be more interested in the friendly locals and their customs, the Mosque-backed graveyard and kasha keyo, a dessert made from screw pine, sorghum, flour and sugar. It looks like pink hamburger pate but soon proves addictive - just like those nighttime visits from the creatures of the lagoon. 
Contact the writer at matthewhodges@chinadaily.com.cn 
(China Daily USA 05/18/2015 page8)
