
During a meeting with representatives of the New Territories Association of Societies on Monday in Beijing, Vice-President Li Yuanchao said achieving universal suffrage for the 2017 Chief Executive (CE) election would be a historic step in advancing democracy for Hong Kong. He said the central government, like most Hong Kong residents, sincerely hoped this would happen. Without this crucial step, the electoral system cannot develop further. 
The association's representatives told reporters after the meeting that Wang Guangya, director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the State Council, reiterated the central government's confidence in Hong Kong's ability to achieve universal suffrage according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC). He also ruled out any likelihood that the central government might back down on matters of principle regarding universal suffrage. 
Clearly, the central government remains fully committed to delivering universal suffrage for Hong Kong - provided it is in accordance with the Basic Law and relevant NPCSC decisions. 
There is no way Beijing will ever give up its constitutional authority over Hong Kong. 
The opposition camp has refused to face reality or to respect the wishes of the public. They are determined to deny 5 million eligible voters in Hong Kong the opportunity to elect the next CE by "one person, one vote" in 2017. In doing so the "pan-democrat" politicians have demonstrated how anti-democratic they are. Nevertheless, such a small number of people do not speak for the great majority of opposition party members. They should let their leaders know how dangerous it is to act against the wishes of the overwhelming majority of Hong Kong people. After all, what opposition politicians are demanding is not only unconstitutional, but undemocratic. 
Opposition members said they rejected NPCSC's landmark decision on Aug 31 last year on the method for selecting the Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017. Their main argument against the Aug 31 decision is based on the imagined "international standards" in the form of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Despite the fact that the United Nations has said the covenant does not constitute a universal format for democracy. 
In truth, all Western democracies have gone through long, difficult processes of development. There has never been, and never will be, an "international standard" of democracy. 
By inventing an "international standard" for universal suffrage, opposition politicians are trying to justify their unconstitutional demands for a chance to enter the CE election without meeting requirements outlined in the Basic Law and NPCSC decisions. They want to seize power in Hong Kong without respecting the national interest or the interests of Hong Kong. Such selfish attitudes are unacceptable in any democratic society. 




(HK Edition 04/21/2015 page1o)

