
The US government has just released its new National Security Strategy which stresses four main features, namely national security, economic development, American values, and the international order. There is nothing dramatically new in the first three, as US presidents always emphasize security, the economy, and democracy, the only difference is the priority given them depending on the circumstances at different times. 
However, this time, the White House has added the fourth element to this document, the international order. It is good that the US seems more willing to accommodate the United Nations and other multilateral organizations to promote world peace and security, as well as global economic prosperity. In the face of the US' domestic situation, the Obama administration has to focus more on partnerships and cooperation for his remaining two years in the White House. 
The new National Security Strategy, however, has not forgotten the US' "rebalancing to Asia and the Pacific". The Obama administration's first National Security Strategy of May 2010 used the term "rebalancing" four times, but none of them applied to the Asia-Pacific region. Indeed, Obama first raised the notion of rebalancing to the Asia-Pacific in 2011. However, given the opportunity presented by drawing up a new National Security Strategy, the White House national security team has reaffirmed the US' commitment to rebalancing to the region. 
According to the latest National Security Strategy, the US will employ a combination of tools in its rebalancing, including "increased diplomacy, stronger alliances and partnerships, expanded trade and investment, and a diverse security posture". In this context, the US National Security Advisor Susan Rice has announced that the Chinese, Japanese, South Korean and Indonesian leaders have been invited to visit the US this year, when she inaugurated the release of the new National Security Strategy. This was a clear signal that the US is diplomatically committed to its rebalancing to East Asia. 
China welcomes the US' diplomatic rebalancing to the Asia-Pacific. Over the last two years, China and the US have worked to build up their mutual military-to-military trust. As Rice said, "We're building a constructive relationship that expands practical cooperation across a wide spectrum of issues from global health to non-proliferation." And the list continues to expand. 
As the UN is approaching the 70th anniversary of its founding, it bears more responsibility in maintaining the post World War II order. Obviously, how the current Japanese government looks at Japan's wartime history will have a big influence on the peace and stability in East Asia. In this context, the US needs to display the leadership it likes to claim and prevent and reverse the emergent Japanese historical revisionism. 
Nevertheless, the White House may have invited the Japanese, South Korean and even Indonesian leaders to Washington to stress alliances and partnerships. Last year, the Obama administration declared the US-Japan Security Treaty covered the Diaoyu Islands, explicitly siding with Japan in its territorial dispute with China over the islands. With South Korea, the US is pressing to deploy the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense missile system, which is likely to further excite a regional arms race. With Indonesia and other members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the US has been keen to push for freedom of navigation, aspiring to reclaim its regional dominance. 
Washington would do better to weigh the cost-effectiveness of inciting more regional disputes backed by its arms against truly moderating its allies and friends to approach differences through dialogue. It is welcome to hear that the US doesn't believe that a China-US conflict is inevitable, but the White House should back up its words with actions. An honest and impartial adherence to the regional order based on international law, rather than US dominance, is the ultimate answer. 
The author is a professor and associate dean at Institute of International Studies, Fudan University. 

(China Daily USA 02/10/2015 page12)

