


      Candidates make strong district council showing ahead of 2016 legislative polls
      
        This year's district council election has taken on extra significance with political parties striving to win more seats and build up a bigger support base at the district level in preparation for next year's legislative polls.
        
          The key incentive is that five district councilors will be able to enter the Legislative Council (LegCo) through the District Council functional constituency, or "super seats".
          
            To gain an admission ticket, a candidate who wishes to contest for a "super seat" needs to be a district council member and nominated by 15 other district councilors.
            
              Four of the current "super seat" holders - James To Kun-sun and Albert Ho Chun-yan of the Democratic Party, Starry Lee Wai-king of the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong (DAB) and Frederick Fung Kin-kee of the Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood - were seeking re-election in this year's district elections.
              
                However, Chan Yuen-han of the Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions (FTU) did not sign up for the district polls and may retire from the political scene next year.
                
                  At the same time, many incumbent legislators and young district councilors were eyeing a LegCo seat through the "super seat" channel.
                  
                    To, who won the most votes among the "super seat" contenders in the 2012 LegCo elections, won this year's district election although he said his campaign had been risky because he had managed to win by just more than 100 votes in this year's elections.
                    
                      Ho also faced an uphill battle as he was challenged by five candidates, including candidates from the pro-establishment camp and radical groups who might dent his chances of retaining his district council seat. By press time he already conceded losing the race to former Law Society chief Julius Ho Kwan-yiu.
                      
                        Fung too was facing stiff competition from newcomer Joephy Chan Wing-yan, who had the support of the two largest pro-establishment organizations - the DAB and the FTU - as well as from his former party colleague Eric Wong Chung-ki. Fung lost to Chan at a margin of 99 ballots.
                        
                          Lee won her re-election bid. She had a relatively easy campaign with her two opponents not posing any serious threat. Retaining the "super seat" is crucial to her and the DAB's LegCo election campaign next year.
                          
                            Among potential "super seat" candidates, lawmaker Wong Kwok-hing planned to fill the slot held by his FTU colleague Chan. He won the district election by a wide margin despite challenges from another pro-establishment candidate and a radical activist.
                            
                              DAB Vice-Chairman Holden Chow Ho-ding was contesting in the district election for the first time following the scrapping of the appointment system. If he wins in the Tung Chung South constituency, he's likely to run in next year's LegCo polls via the "super seat" channel.
                              
                                Pro-establishment lawmaker Paul Tse Wai-chun also won his election, but repeatedly denied it was a bid to pave way for the "super seat" election with his city-wide popularity.
                                
                                  Democratic Party Vice-Chairman Lo Kin-hei hoped that winning a "super seat" would help him in the party's succession plan. He won in the Lei Tung II constituency.
                                  
                                    Civic Party lawmaker Kenneth Chan Ka-lok contested in the district election, but his hope of securing a super seat in 2016, and vacating his LegCo seat (Hong Kong Island constituency) was dashed.
                                    
                                      joseph@chinadailyhk.com
                                      (HK Edition 11/23/2015 page2)

