


      How can some students of the University of Hong Kong (HKU) who stormed into a meeting of the governing council justify their disrespectful and violent behavior?
      
        Adding insult to injury, these unruly students hurled abuse at council members and held them hostage. The members were forced to remain in the meeting room - illegal detention would be the correct term to describe this action - and listen to what the students had to say.
        
          Leaders of HKU's Student Union (HKUSU) have claimed their actions were for "democracy" and "human rights". Are members of the university council not entitled to human and democratic rights? Hypocrisy and flagrant violation of other individuals' human rights in order to achieve their non-negotiable demands seem to be "acceptable" and "democratic" to the HKUSU.
          
            HKU is regarded globally as an academic institution of distinction. Its self-governance is administered through the council and other panels, and the rules and regulations established under its constitution. Students, regardless of the merits of their grievances, must observe the constitution and rules in exercising their right to question, to complain or to raise issues with these bodies. No one is allowed to go beyond these parameters and threaten others in such a thuggish manner.
            
              Heated debates are nothing new to me. I was on the council in Redbridge, London, and chaired it as mayor. Local citizens and representatives from pressure groups were all welcome to come to the council chamber or one of the meeting rooms to present their disputes. Sometimes hundreds of people would turn up to present their cases, and on these occasions the council had its own security staff working alongside the local police to make the event safe and orderly for all.
              
                In my role as mayor and chairman of the council, I had to follow the constitution to ensure both the councilors and members of the public observed the conduct required for meetings. No one is exempt from these rules. When one saw the student union president Billy Fung Jing-en speaking inside the meeting room of the HKU Council with his own microphone and loudspeaker, one knew instantly that the "invasion" was premeditated or would be regarded as displaying "malice aforethought" by the legal profession. These illegal actions, I would suggest, must be taken up in a court of law by the council. Anything less would subject its members and future meetings to undue pressure, not to mention encourage further illegal activities organized by the HKUSU and other groups to undermine the council and the reputation of HKU.
                
                  The issue the students want the council to consider is that they would like to see the post of pro-vice-chancellor filled immediately - before the appointment of the provost. To me and, I suppose, to most people, this is both an administrative and human resources issue for the council to consider. The students have every right to voice their concerns through their representative on the council. But without any in-depth knowledge of the reasoning and procedures of the council, are students prepared to force their views on it every time they are unhappy with the timing of university appointments, agenda items, council membership and so on?
                  
                    I would think that if the council were to express its views on the timetable or candidacy for election of officers of the HKUSU, there would certainly be cries of "dictatorship", "end of democracy and freedom" or other such utterances from all sides. The HKUSU's actions seem to be a case of "do as I say" and not "do as I do".
                    
                      The HKUSU, the Hong Kong Professional Teachers' Union (HKPTU) and a few "pan-democratic" groups have also been vocal about the Chief Executive being the chancellor of HKU. If we look at university chancellorships in the UK, the picture is very clear. Most universities have royals, archbishops or members of the House of Lords as their chancellors.
                      
                        Prince Charles, for example, is chancellor of the University of Wales and the Royal Agricultural University. Is his royal highness involved in the administrative affairs of these universities? I doubt it - for these are all honorary positions.
                        
                          In the UK as in most other nations, universities, colleges and schools are self-governing bodies. As the council's representative on different school boards of governors during my time as a councilor, I worked closely with other governors representing teachers, parents and the community. Board decisions are taken collectively and are never improperly influenced by any individuals. Students from HKU and the leaders of HKPTU surely should understand this aspect of governance. They should desist from making allegations when they do not have sufficient proof.
                          
                            They may not like the current Chief Executive, Leung Chun-ying, as the chancellor of HKU - and that is fine. But they should not misrepresent the role of chancellor.
                            
                              The truth, as they say, will always come out.
                              
                                The author is the director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                                
(HK Edition 08/03/2015 page9)

