
A joint survey recently conducted by the Chinese General Chamber of Commerce (CGCC) and the Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong Kong (CMA) showed that over 93 percent of their members approved the introduction of an electoral system incorporating universal suffrage for the election of the Chief Executive (CE) in the HKSAR from 2017 as scheduled, and 95 percent agreed that such a system of universal suffrage should be implemented in conformity with the Basic Law and Aug 31 decision of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC). 
The joint survey by two of Hong Kong's major business associations shows the desire of the majority in the business community to witness the implementation of an election by "one person, one vote" in two years' time. After the government released its electoral reform proposals last month, Hong Kong business tycoon Lee Shau-kee told media that if the proposal were passed, the SAR would have a brighter, more stable future. This would benefit economic development, prosperity and also the stock market. The benchmark Hang Seng Index could possibly even rise as high as 29,000 to 30,000. 
Aside from the business community, more citizens have expressed their hopes for realizing universal suffrage in 2017, as shown by opinion polls conducted by various organizations over the past few months. The majority of Hong Kong people have indicated their support for current electoral reform proposals tabled by the SAR government. Some also expect further refinements to the electoral system in future. They fully understand that if the current proposals are thwarted, Hong Kong will miss a precious opportunity to allow democratic development to proceed. 
I believe every sensible citizen is aware that constitutional reform is a milestone in Hong Kong's democratic development. If the process of electoral reforms goes smoothly, it will no doubt contribute greatly to the long-term prosperity of the city and help the business environment. But if the proposals fail, endless political wrangling awaits Hong Kong, which will harm the future of the city in many respects. 
During the British colonial era, the most powerful person in Hong Kong was the colonial governor, who was selected and appointed in the United Kingdom. At present, selection of the CE is through the 1,200-member Election Committee. If the proposed electoral reforms are passed and adopted, selecting CE by universal suffrage will no longer be a dream - by then, 5 million eligible voters in Hong Kong will select their leader by "one person, one vote". Democratic progress over the years since the handover is clearly evident. 
The electoral reforms are designed to deal with the actual situation. The currently proposed electoral system is unlikely to stay unchanged should it be successfully introduced. It will change as the actual situation changes, and be subject to further refinement. This means the case for opposing the current proposals is weak. 
Viewed from any perspective, constitutional development proposed by the SAR government is a huge step forward. The "pan-democrats" constantly claiming to fight for democracy, should more than anyone else embrace the proposals and celebrate them. But in reality, they are acting against their original intentions, and trying to sabotage the city's attempts to advance democracy. 
Hong Kong is privileged to be the first special administrative region to implement universal suffrage - this is a precious opportunity to further advance democracy in the city. I sincerely hope the proposal gains full public support and is passed by the Legislative Council. 




(HK Edition 05/12/2015 page6)

