
The opposition camp's staunch resistance to electoral reform is not about "real democracy", but its own survival, Chairman of the China-Australia Legal Exchange Foundation Lawrence Ma Yan-kwok told China Daily. 
The city's landmark constitutional reform package will be put to a vote by the legislature in mid-June. But opposition lawmakers are threatening to veto Hong Kong's first-ever election by universal suffrage because they oppose details in the proposal. 
Ma said the opposition's resistance was not really over "genuine universal suffrage". He said it was all about the survival of the opposition camp, which would have little reason to exist within a more democratic Hong Kong. 
The barrister attacked opposition arguments for vetoing Hong Kong's first chance to have democracy in 155 years. 
He rejected the opposition's claim that there should be no screening of candidates in a democratic system. Ma argued that every democratic country, without exception, had its own screening process. This is needed to decide who will stand as a leader during an election. 
The opposition camp claims the government's package precludes their participation as candidates. But Ma cited the example of candidates in Australia's Labor Party. They must secure 50 percent support from the party caucus before standing for election, he noted. 



Ma said there were no legal restrictions on people with different political views to be CE candidates as long as they can convince members of the Nominating Committee they are patriots. 
The opposition argues "civil nomination" is essential for Hong Kong's electoral system. 
Ma said "civil nomination" unnecessarily dilutes the pool of candidates, with a proliferation of fringe candidates. It therefore stops candidates representing wider sections of society. 
"If a Chief Executive candidate supported by 100,000 nominations from the public is elected, he could potentially ignore other sectors' interests This could cause unfairness to other sectors," Ma said. 
He also condemned opposition claims that once the reform package is approved Hong Kong people will have it forever. "This is absolutely false," Ma stressed. 
"There is no place in the world which has not improved their electoral system," the barrister added. 
He explained that provisions in the Basic Law allow for amendments to the electoral system, thereby providing a legal basis for future improvements. 
Hong Kong's electoral system has been changed twice - in 2002 and 2012 when the Election Committee was expanded from 400 people to 800 and 1,200, respectively. 
Passing the constitutional reform package will be the third change to bring greater democracy in just 18 years since the handover, Ma said. 
Given the current pace of reforms, he expects further enhancements by 2022. 
Ma also refuted the opposition's claim that the central government should not and does not have the right to appoint Hong Kong's leader. 
China, along with the majority of the world's nations, is a unitary state with sovereignty flowing from the central government. This is in contrast to a minority of countries which have a federal system based on power sharing between national and regional jurisdictions, he said. 
stushadow@chinadailyhk.com 
(HK Edition 05/26/2015 page4)

