
Greece's far-left Syriza party has formed a new coalition government on Monday with a center-right fringe party, but its stance against austerity, privatization, foreign investment, the United States and Germany may create waves of uncertainty in coming days. 
Alexis Tsipras, the 40-year-old leader of Syriza, pledged to renegotiate Greece's massive international bailout and vowed to end what he called Greece's five years of "humiliation and pain". But European leaders in Germany, Belgium, the UK and France have warned him to stop making promises he can't fulfill. 
Tsipras was sworn in as Greece's new prime minister on Monday. Observers in Athens have urged Tsipras to actively engage with China and visit the country as soon as possible to maintain the momentum of the relationship. 
"I hope our new leader will be pragmatic about China-Greece relations," said Christos Vlachos, managing partner at Athens-based Silky Finance, an independent financial adviser that assists companies in restructuring or raising money. 
"I thought it was a good sign that he is negotiating to form a coalition government with a partner party that is pro-market and foreign investment. 
"Ideally, he should choose China for his first overseas trip after taking office to attract investment - that is the common voice of Greek businesses." 
Voting results show that Syriza fell just short of the two seats needed to win an absolute majority in Parliament, which has 300 seats. Antonis Samaras, the New Democracy leader, admitted failure in the election at a Sunday news conference. He telephoned Tsipras to congratulate him on his victory, Financial Times reported. 
"Foreign investment is so crucial for our economy to recover, and the new government and leaders should bear this in mind," said Alex Kaminaris, director of Liberty, a Greek real estate dealer. 
Kaminaris said Greece should not close the door to foreign investment from other countries, especially China. 
"If we do, our situation will go back to the worst again," he said. "With a cheap euro, this is another window of opportunity for Greece to deepen economic relations with China." 
fujing@chinadaily.com.cn 


(China Daily USA 01/27/2015 page3)
