


      Chan Tak-leung writes that HK can learn some valuable lessons from Britain on education policy, while London can take its cue from the SAR's housing initiatives
      
        In my previous two articles comparing Hong Kong and London, I examined their respective governance and infrastructure, as well as cultural diversity and tolerance. Now let us take a closer look at two other aspects - education and housing - Hong Kong and London can definitely learn from one another on.
        
          As far as education is concerned, all state-funded schools in London have to follow the national curriculum which applies to all parts of Britain. The aim of the curriculum is to promote the spiritual, moral, cultural, mental and physical development of pupils at school and in society. It also prepares pupils for the opportunities, responsibilities and experiences of later life.
          
            Educationists and parents in Hong Kong may be interested to know that all students living and studying in London between the ages of 11 and 16, or Key Stages 3 and 4 (Key Stages set the educational knowledge expected of students at various ages in the UK's state education system), will have compulsory subjects including citizenship, foreign languages (for pupils aged 7 to 11 at Key Stage 2 as well) and modern languages.
            
              Mandarin, interestingly enough, has been offered as one of the foreign languages among French, German, Italian, Spanish and a classical language (Latin or Greek) since 2013.
              
                Hong Kong's curriculum is slightly different. Although English is compulsory for pupils from the beginning of their primary education, learning another foreign language is not on the agenda. As a result, Hong Kong students are slightly behind in the area of foreign languages. It seems illogical to see British pupils learning to speak Mandarin in Britain while Cantonese-speaking pupils in Hong Kong may speak better English than their counterparts in London yet their ability to speak Mandarin is limited. Let us hope Hong Kong's Education Bureau and its curriculum partners will examine the inclusion of foreign language learning for pupils, other than Chinese and English, in its primary and secondary school curriculums before too long. As we all know, the younger you learn a language, the easier it is.
                
                  Since 2011, the proposed introduction of Moral, Civic and National Education in Hong Kong had been mired in controversy. Civic education curriculum reform has been on the back burner ever since. As it is important for pupils to develop local, national and global dimensions to their lives in order to improve their competitiveness and to meet the challenges of the future, it is vital for Hong Kong to review its civic education syllabus to ensure pupils receive knowledge through appropriate tuition in schools - and not from other biased sources. They need to learn about governance, rule of law, justice, freedom, democracy, human rights and public service in order to make positive civic contributions to society when they are able to.
                  
                    Lesson number three, therefore, is for the Education Bureau to review, consult and update the curriculum relating to languages and civic education.
                    
                      The shortage of affordable housing is not a unique problem for Hong Kong. London has a similar housing crisis, with overcrowding, soaring house prices, homelessness, unscrupulous landlords, long waiting lists for public housing, multiple occupancy, even the sale of social housing - the list seems endless. In my borough of Redbridge alone, the majority of housing tenure - 91 percent or 91,720 units - is in the private sector, while our social housing is only 5 percent or 5,111 units. Last year, 200 new units for social housing were made available. But with a waiting list of nearly 7,800, the majority of people will have to wait between four and 11 years, depending on the size of properties that they are waiting for. The mayor of London might have an annual new homes target of 63,000 units for all 32 boroughs, but it would be extremely difficult for my borough to find the space to build even 500, let alone the target of nearly 2,000.
                      
                        We all know land is at a premium in Hong Kong. The government is planning to provide a massive supply of land in the New Territories for home building programs. Since Hong Kong has a very extensive and comprehensive public transport system, residents in these new districts will have no problem in commuting to their destinations - to study, to work or pursue leisure activities.
                        
                          London, by comparison, may have more developable land, but planning and environmental constraints also prevent building targets being met. Ideas to reduce the housing shortage in London include building on greenbelt land and brownfield sites, penalties for owners of empty properties, long-term renting instead of home ownership, and encouraging older people to move to smaller flats. London has similar transport infrastructure to Hong Kong so perhaps the mayor of London should take the example of the Hong Kong government's ambitious housing building program to heart and act promptly to improve this issue soon.
                          
                            The author is the director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                            
(HK Edition 09/04/2015 page17)

