


      It is interesting, but not surprising, that the US publication Fortune selected Joshua Wong, the convener of Scholarism, as No 10 on its 2015 list of the World's 50 Greatest Leaders.
      
        The magazine did provide caveats for its selections and I quote, "to make this roster, it was not enough to be brilliant, admirable or even supremely powerful". I think the magazine definitely anticipates comment and criticism of its selections for choosing the wrong individuals. Wong certainly meets all these reservations.
        
          It went on to state that the individuals selected were "leaders with vision who moved others to act". Wong did meet these criteria, but here's the reason why I said his selection was not surprising: Fortune's "appropriate experts", who made the nominations, ignored the fact that this particular nominee convened Scholarism to oppose the introduction of national education in Hong Kong. His activities in this regard - had they taken place in the US - would have been regarded as non-patriotic and disloyal to the country. He would not have been recognized as a leader.
          
            Wong used a hunger strike as his bargaining chip to get sympathy for the Scholarism movement. He used it again during the dying days of the illegal "Occupy Central" movement. History shows he had neither the determination nor the will to follow up his words with action. Clearly, he does not have the qualities expected of a leader.
            
              This nominee then went on to ignore the "One Country, Two Systems" policy, the authority of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) and the Basic Law, which governs any changes to Hong Kong's transition to universal suffrage.
              
                It should also be remembered that Wong and his supporters embarked on illegal acts of civil unrest. These resulted in hardship, financial loss, personal injury and inconvenience to many. Would a leader do that? Certainly not! A world leader has to make hard choices and even harder decisions in the best interests of the majority. Wong's actions make him unworthy of the epithet of "leader" - let alone one of the world's greatest leaders.
                
                  Since his involvement with Scholarism, Wong has been groomed by the Civic Party to take up its mantle in the pursuit of their political goals. A leader he is not - more like a pawn whom others can manipulate at will - by ghost writing for him or texting him messages so that he can then go on and incite violence.
                  
                    As a result of his relative youth, certain Western media, especially from the US and Britain, seek to portray him through their publications with only one objective - to upset China and meddle in China's internal affairs since they are still indignant about the fact that China assumed sovereignty over Hong Kong 17 years ago.
                    
                      In the last couple of years the foreign media propelled Wong to fame (or notoriety). "The Face of Protest" and "The Voice of a Generation" by the Time magazine, "...picks up democracy baton in Hong Kong" by the Financial Times, "...the public face of the Hong Kong protests" by the Guardian and "Protest Leader" by the BBC.
                      
                        Fortune may list him as one of the world's greatest leaders. I would suggest Wong is exactly the opposite. Instead of guiding other people, his involvement has resulted in disrupting the introduction of national education in Hong Kong as well as inciting illegal civil disobedience. Wong also caused immeasurable inconvenience to numerous citizens, significant economic losses to the region and will perhaps forfeit the right of 5 million voters to take part in elections by universal suffrage to elect the Chief Executive for the first time.
                        
                          Wong is undoubtedly someone who has caused trouble in Hong Kong over the last few months with a catalogue of ill-judged, miss-informed activities that promoted nothing but himself. He has asked for the restart of the constitutional consultation process and the withdrawal of the NPCSC decisions, hijacked the "Occupy Central" movement, became involved in shambolic hunger strike, and called for the resignation of Legislative Council members to test voting intentions. The list goes on.
                          
                            His inclusion in the list was obviously deliberate, partisan and mischievous to say the least. Should anyone really care about Fortune's silly behavior? I think they should. There should at least be an attempt to understand the motivation behind this nomination.
                            
                              Despite all this I am still an optimist and believe the world is a fair place as the story on the 2015 World's Greatest Leaders appeared in the April 1, 2015 of Fortune. Does this ring any bells for you? If not, I'll give you a clue - don't be taken in by it and be an April fool!
                              
                                The author is director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                                
(HK Edition 04/02/2015 page10)

