The ever-evolving tragedy which is Greece's modern economy has distressed all those of us who love that benighted country, as well as bringing very severe social problems to its own citizens - and to many others (the lenders) as well. It is both sad and ironic that Greece, the world's birthplace of democracy, should now be reduced to such dire straits - facing interlinked, hard-to-solve economic, social and political problems of the greatest magnitude. One can't help wondering if populist politics, an all too common feature of many democracies, has been the cause of its downfall.
Hong Kong's economic model provides an exemplar of how these things ought to be managed. It is the misfortune of the Greeks that, hitherto, little attempt has been made in Athens to emulate Hong Kong's economic success. With the sovereign country of Greece (population about 11 million) and this Chinese city of Hong Kong (population 7.2 million) having roughly similar-sized GDPs, why is one deeply mired in debt (Greece) while the other (Hong Kong) is sitting upon billions of dollars in largely untouched public financial reserves?
Any tourist to Greece will be all too familiar with the bad joke that is Greek plumbing; with the commonly found rip-off taxi drivers; and indeed with the general level of apparent anarchy which prevails there. It seems to be everyone for himself, with many a Greek citizen taking dubious steps to avoid paying taxes into the government's empty coffers. Successive Greek governments have been ineffective in instilling acceptance of the rule of law (i.e., citizens contributing by paying taxes to their own country's public economy); whereas Hong Kong's Inland Revenue Department is very effective in getting us taxpayers to cough up on time. And yet, without enough domestic tax income coming in, the Greek government has nevertheless smiled upon rash and over-generous pension schemes and other social provision, including public healthcare, for its people - schemes that there is simply not the money to finance.
It may be all very well to generously offer early retirement to workers, perhaps in their 50s, if the employer and state can readily afford that. But where such luxuries can in no way be afforded, as in Greece, it is the height of economic ineptitude to offer them, for they cannot be sustained.
Such a charge could never be made against the Hong Kong government. Indeed, our ever-growing fiscal reserves are much larger than are reasonably needed. Our government-held public funds are unfortunately not tapped into in support of our niggardly so-called "retirement protection", the MPF scheme.
There are those who say that the mainland model, of controlled capitalism, has much to recommend it. If we judge by results, they may well have a point: Greece's public debt has risen exponentially under successive "democratic" governments; while the mainland's future prosperity seems assured, with substantial spare funds to finance more growth-stimulating projects that benefit other countries.
Then there is the startling issue of Athens so often going ahead with borrowing ever larger sums from overseas sources, when the reality is that even the interest on these gigantic loans cannot be paid on time, and with little real prospect of these vast capital sums ever being repaid. The lenders are also morally culpable, for permitting the Greek state to borrow far more than it can possibly manage to repay. Some of these unrealistic "loans" may well have to be completely written off.
Hong Kong people are famously hardworking, reliable, prudent and efficient. Having previously experienced living in Greece, my view is that such general adjectives could seldom be appropriately applied to the Greek population at large, though of course there would be many individual honorable exceptions to that blanket statement. Therein lies one of the main causes of Greece's present troubles. If it is made easier to borrow funds from other countries than to work to earn them on your own, there can be little encouragement to entrepreneurs or workers in Greece to strive to support themselves - and thereby to support their country as well. Those international organizations which have too readily aided Greece on its long and troubled road to financial ruin, including the International Monetary Fund and the European Union, must bear part of the responsibility.
Thankfully, Hong Kong's overflowing public coffers mean that borrowing is absolutely not necessary here. And in any case, were that to change - a most unlikely scenario - we may feel confident that future financial secretaries would be prudent enough never to borrow more than we can repay. Such fiscal common sense has been sadly lacking in successive Greek governments, and the Greek people themselves are now suffering badly as a result.
Regrettably, the Greek crisis is not going to be resolved soon. It may even get worse before it gets any better. The glory that was Ancient Greece may never reappear, but we may yet hope for better times soon for the troubled Greek people.



(HK Edition 07/24/2015 page9)
