
Datong: the Chinese Utopia, which debuted last weekend, shifts the focus somewhat from Qing Dynasty social reformer Kang Youwei to his spirited daughter Kang Tongbi. A review by Chitralekha Basu. 
Anyone interested in the story of the making of modern China would know of the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911) public intellectual Kang Youwei, whose abortive Hundred Days Reform policy earned him the wrath of Dowager Empress Cixi. Kang fled China to save his life, travelled widely and was often treated as something of a prime minister in exile in the West. Kang's daughter Tongbi, who accompanied her father for much of his life as a fugitive, expectedly, lived in her father's shadow. 
Kang Tongbi was in fact one of China's first feminists. The first Asian to go to Barnard College in New York, Tongbi mobilized a campaign to resist foot-binding among young women on her return to China in 1911. She was also a passionate advocate of her father's idealistic vision of turning China into a constitutional monarchy - a highly-idealized precursor of the present-day notion of the welfare state, inspired by the ancient Chinese philosopher-politician Confucius (551-479 BC). Kang Tongbi lived long enough to see her father's memory insulted and vilified by the Red Guards during the Cultural Revolution, although Mao Zedong himself had professed admiration for the socialist tenets Kang laid down in his book Da Tongshu (The Book of Great Unity). 
Evans Chan, who has told this story before in his film Datong: the Great Society, has now adapted the same material into opera, in a new production supported by Hong Kong Arts Festival. Datong: the Chinese Utopia featuring a stellar line-up of artistic talents - conductor Lio Kuok-man, soprano Louise Kwong and tenor Chen Chen among them - debuted last weekend. 
It is Kang Tongbi's story all the way. Opening with her encounter with a Christian missionary on a boat from Hong Kong to Penang in 1901, the opera charts Tongbi's journey and continues right until her final days in Beijing, bed-ridden and traumatized by the slogan-shouting of stomping Red Guards. Clutching on to Da Tongshu, and the memories of watching her father complete the book in exile in Darjeeling, India, Kang Tongbi, now old, decrepit and ailing, wonders what's worse: that Confucius' works should be thrown to the flames as part of Cultural Revolution-era intolerance or that there was no one like Confucius left in China anymore. Her lament brings to mind a similar sequence from Bertolt Brecht's play Galileo, in which the scientist imprisoned for blasphemy sighs "unhappy is the land that needs a hero." 
A relatively lesser-known historical event is made the centerpiece of the opera. Kang Youwei and his daughter are shown to have played crucial roles in making the former American president Theodore Roosevelt rethink the Chinese Exclusion Act, which barred Chinese from immigrating to the US. "Kang Youwei's orchestration of the 1904-1905 anti-American boycott to counteract the US Chinese Exclusion Act was serious enough for a conciliatory Roosevelt to meet Kang twice, and modify the unfair treatment of Chinese in America," says librettist Evans Chan. "The boycott can be viewed as the first modern Chinese 'mass' movement." 
Too utopian? 
Some of Kang's intentions appear retrogressive in the present context. The idea of gradual homogenization of human society into a race of fair-skinned, uniformly-intelligent people, for instance, sounds not only absurd but racist. The first time Kang Youwei and his followers appear on stage - in a moth-eaten old photograph as it were (full credit to Yuen Hon-wai for the spectacular set design and lighting designer Billy Chan) - urging his audience to harness chaos and cultivate harmony, one wonders if some of Kang's notions do not belong in the sepia-tinted pages of history, too backward or romantic to be of value in the modern world. 
"There are certain aspects of his vision that work even now," says director Tang Shu-wing, "like he advocated equality between men and women." It makes sense to keep in mind the politically-volatile situation in the backdrop, he reminds us. "We are looking at a pivotal figure in search of democracy and liberalism in China, harking back to Confucius for instruction." 
"I certainly don't think Kang's Da Tongshu can or should be used as a blueprint for building a society," comments Evans Chan. "But his views on women's rights, minority rights, and even gay rights resonate with today's global culture." 
Datong: the Chinese Utopia comes at a time when "a very serious reappraisal of Kang's legacy is happening both within and without China", informs Chan. "Kang's revival of Confucianism is no longer simply dismissed as 'anomalous' and 'reactionary'. Over the several decades when condemnation of Chinese civilization was all the rage among Chinese intellectuals, Kang's respect for his own culture was steadfast, but not uncritical." 
Even if one were to play down the awesome performances put in by the entire team, the new production is a laudable effort in acknowledging Kang Tongbi's zealous commitment to being the custodian of her father's legacy. 
Contact the writer at basu@chinadailyhk.com 







(HK Edition 03/27/2015 page7)

