


      James Ning writes that there is no sign that the 'pan-democratic' camp will stop behaving in ways detrimental to the best interests of Hong Kong
      
        Hong Kong is still coming to terms with the fact that the SAR government's plan to implement universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive election did not get through the Legislative Council last week.
        
          There is no doubt the great majority of Hong Kong residents will hold the opposition parties responsible for denying them their chance to elect the next CE by "one person, one vote" in 2017. Those who engineered this political tragedy, however, not only celebrated, but also demanded the five-stage constitutional reform process be restarted immediately. As expected, they want the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) to retract the framework decision on the method for selecting the CE by universal suffrage in 2017. They insist this was the main reason why they vetoed the reform bill.
          
            The framework decision of the NPCSC, which was announced on Aug 31 last year, can be seen as a more detailed guideline for implementing universal suffrage in the 2017 CE election according to the Basic Law. The opposition camp has been crying foul ever since. They have accused the NPCSC of depriving Hong Kong voters of "meaningful choices" by screening election candidates. Their argument is based on the same fraudulent assumption which prompted them to claim there are "international standards" for democracy, in general, and for universal suffrage, in particular. They believe the average person would not know whether or not they are lying about this. Maybe they just don't care if people believe them as long as they have an excuse to do whatever they want. This includes blocking traffic in busy public thoroughfares and attacking government facilities in the name of "civil disobedience".
            
              Some people tried to defend the opposition parties' abusive behavior with empty comments about political idealism and a "just cause" marred by inexperience. But they failed to explain why the "pan-democrats" keep repeating the same mistakes over and over again. The fact is the opposition camp cannot convince the public any of their leaders is capable of heading an SAR government. Therefore, none of them stands even a slim chance of winning the CE office with or without "screening". There are plenty of indications they know this as well as everyone else.
              
                Why, then, are they still trying to give people the impression they badly want the CE job and will do anything to get it? It is because they want to prove the "One Country, Two Systems" policy does not work in Hong Kong. In order to succeed, they have to do everything they can to sabotage the lawful administration of the SAR government, including constitutional development. If, hypothetically, they could somehow get the NPCSC to retract its decision, and one of them then went on to win the CE election, Beijing would have no choice but to refuse to appoint that person as CE. This would create a "constitutional crisis" with international repercussions. Then, they will have a convincing reason to claim that the "One Country, Two Systems" policy has failed.
                
                  That is not all. Such an outcome will also give "Taiwan independence" supporters the perfect reason to declare the "One Country, Two Systems" policy will not work in Taiwan, either. That will help convince many Taiwan residents to reject reunification with the motherland. As long as Taiwan and Hong Kong remain problems for Beijing, the peaceful development of China will be disrupted. That is why the US government is so supportive of the opposition camp in Hong Kong and the "green camp" in Taiwan. Washington is having a very hard time dealing with an ailing economy while doing its best to convince its citizens the country has to spend more on military actions overseas. The Barack Obama administration is concerned that China is taking advantage of this opportunity and filling some regional "power vacuums" the US really wishes it could control.
                  
                    Now, we know how much is at stake in Hong Kong; but is the strategy of the "pan-democrats" really working? My answer is "No". At the very least, it is too early to tell because the opposition camp is nowhere near achieving its strategic goals at this point. They are not sure yet if they can win more seats in the upcoming district council elections in November or in next year's legislative elections.
                    
                      Some political pundits have suggested it should not be too hard for the "pan-democrats" to retain the critical minority in LegCo they currently enjoy when it comes to fight for LegCo seats under the existing election system. However, after the failed illegal "Occupy Central" campaign last year and the latest blow to public trust by destroying people's hopes of electing the CE by universal suffrage in 2017, no one can say for sure whether local voters will "forgive and forget" them. Indeed, many Hong Kong residents are so angry with the "pan-democrats" they have sworn to punish them in upcoming elections. So far, there is no indication the opposition will stop doing things that harm the public interest. We will have to wait and see.
                      
                        The author is a current affairs commentator.
                        
(HK Edition 06/26/2015 page11)

