
Tony Kwok warns that if the reform package is vetoed then HK will suffer the most: It will hurt the local economy, and many people will lose their jobs
The "pan-democrats" might claim victory in successfully saying "no" to the government's electoral reform package if it is vetoed at the Legislative Council. But who will be the real winners and losers of such an outcome?
Will Beijing be the loser? I believe the central government would be disappointed with such a result as they genuinely wish to see universal suffrage prevailing in Hong Kong, not just to fulfill their promise under the Basic Law, but also as a testing ground for further democratic development on the mainland.
Would Beijing succumb to the wishes of the "pan-democrats" by revising the Aug 31 resolution of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) and allow the Western type of democracy to take hold in Hong Kong? I don't think so, and here are at least three reasons why:
First, I have been giving lectures in many cities on the mainland and have the opportunity to speak to senior city officials. My impression is that many of them are jealous of the over-generous attitude Beijing had toward Hong Kong after the handover. As a government of 1.3 billion people and 662 cities, Beijing needs to take the sentiments of the local leaders into account and it would not be right for the central government to appear to be succumbing to the demands of a small group of activists in one city, just to prevent them causing social turmoil and economic losses. This is more so now that Hong Kong is no longer as important to Beijing as it was in 1997.
Second, Taiwan's recent political history has given Beijing cause for concern that if Western-style democracy is established in Hong Kong, it is entirely possible that an anti-communist candidate, or someone with a secret agenda for a foreign power, can win the election. Such a prospect is absolutely unacceptable to Beijing, and understandably so, especially in the current international political climate.
Third, the "pan-democrats" have always been using foreign power to pressure the central government over Hong Kong affairs. However, even on the international political stage, Beijing is seen to have fulfilled its obligation under the Basic Law in allowing universal suffrage to take place in Hong Kong in 2017. The SAR government's electoral reform package has proven to be acceptable to the majority of Legislative Council members and to the general public. If the package fails to pass through LegCo, this is only due to the self-serving politics of a minority of LegCo members - the "pan-democrats" and their allies.
So what's likely to happen after a veto?
Firstly the opposition's wishful thinking that the central government would give in to their demands will never happen. Beijing will undoubtedly stand firm for the reasons I have stated. The current and next SAR governments will probably not re-visit this universal suffrage issue for the next 10 years. This is because it needs to focus on the much-neglected livelihood issues and energize Hong Kong's economy which has fallen behind its traditional rivals in many aspects in recent years.
Secondly, Beijing will now wean itself of its over-reliance on Hong Kong as the nation's international financial center, and will accelerate the development of Shanghai and Shenzhen to replace Hong Kong's traditional role as China's window to the outside world. Hong Kong will also likely lose out as a major player in the country's new and ambitious "One Belt One Road" initiative. There has been suggestion that the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank might open a branch office in Hong Kong, but Beijing may become reluctant to do this if the reform package is vetoed in the LegCo. All these will translate into huge economic losses for Hong Kong, with many people losing their jobs as a result of these unpleasant developments provoked by the veto.
Thirdly, Beijing may start to reconsider 2047 the end date of Hong Kong's high degree of autonomy, and possibly take administrative control over Hong Kong by then, amalgamating it with Shenzhen.
Fourthly, international confidence in Hong Kong will be shaken. Investors will worry about the political instability of Hong Kong. Whether HSBC will decide to move their headquarters back to Hong Kong will be seen as a litmus test.
So the only thing the "pan-democrats" will have achieved with their veto is to create a debilitating distrust between Beijing and Hong Kong, and serious political chaos and economic damage for Hong Kong.
The only remedy is for Hong Kong people to speak up with their votes by throwing the "pan-democrats" out of LegCo in next year's election because they do not represent Hong Kong's best interests! Otherwise, Hong Kong people will be the biggest losers!
The author is a former deputy commissioner of ICAC and currently honorary fellow of HKU SPACE & Open University.


(HK Edition 06/17/2015 page12)

