


      Dr Lam writes that despite its status as a sacred banner, democracy has a checkered past - and its enthusiasts must remember that the rule of law takes precedence over it
      
        Calls for democracy in Hong Kong have grown much louder since the July 1, 2003 mass rally in the city. They are so loud these days even the central government found it necessary to reiterate more than once the official interpretation of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle in order to maintain the "Hong Kong people governing Hong Kong" policy.
        
          The suitability of "democracy" and "universal suffrage" to a society has always been a topic of fierce debate in Western societies and such conflicts are therefore not unique to Hong Kong. In fact, some scholars have gone so far as to describe "universal suffrage" as the worst political system under certain circumstances and heralding the decline of Western civilization (see more in Philip Atkinson's The French Revolution - the Start of the Decline Of Western Civilization and Edmund Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in France at ourcivilization.com).
          
            In today's world there is no shortage of democracies, but many of these political systems are fraught with illegal practices and have performed poorly in trying to improve people's livelihoods. Practices such as vote-buying, under-the-table "democratic trade-offs" and even personal enrichment abound. More dangerous is that attempts to implement democracy before the natural and human conditions are ready may lead to a massive catastrophe. For example, the disintegration of the Soviet Block in the 1980s gave rise to democracy in the former Yugoslavia, only to leave the country ravaged by a protracted civil war caused by ethnic and religious conflicts with heavy loss of human lives and property. That tragedy remains unresolved today. In some other nations, the democratic system has been unable to improve significantly the quality of most people's lives since World War II. What function does democracy serve if it cannot change people's lives for the better?
            
              If raising the living standards of its people is the basic mission for every government leader, then for a vast, ethnically diversified and rapidly developing nation like China, the highest priority is securing the rule of law, specifically that "everyone is equal in front of the law". Of course, China still has many serious problems such as corruption, economic instability and so on, that remain to be solved. These are largely legal, rather than democratic, issues. In this regard, it is of interest to note that traditionally many government leaders in Europe and the United States graduate from law school, further highlighting the importance of practicing the rule of law in governing a nation.
              
                For more than one and a half centuries under colonial rule, Hong Kong never had democracy. All the top administrators in Hong Kong were handpicked by the British government. The absence of democracy was never an issue back then, as Hong Kong people hardly ever seriously demanded it anyway. Instead, the British government designed and built a well-rounded legal system based on the common law philosophy for the city, providing a set of "reliable rules of the game" everybody must follow. Under this system, Hong Kong became increasingly prosperous and Hong Kong people's living standards kept rising. Their contentment, confidence and diligence in turn resulted in the phenomenal economic success and stability of Hong Kong in the post-war era, making it one of the safest, freest and most beloved cities in the world. Besides establishing the rule of law, the British government was also hailed for giving Hong Kong people a great deal of freedom under the law. This brand of governance without democracy worked so well in Hong Kong that it impressed not only the outside world but also the central government in Beijing. It encouraged Beijing to establish the visionary policies of "One Country, Two Systems", "Hong Kong People governing Hong Kong" and "Unchanged for 50 Years".
                
                  Since the handover in 1997, the central government has done its best to keep these promises and help Hong Kong stay prosperous. Although there have been conflicts and constant debates about various issues, most Hong Kong residents who participated in the public protests were not so much unhappy with the Basic Law as dissatisfied with their worsening living conditions. They therefore questioned the competence of the Hong Kong government. Many of them see "democracy" and "universal suffrage" as sacred banners to express their views and frustrations. Whether the current Hong Kong government is or is not competent is already a much debated issue. It is, however, essential to realize that even pledges for democracy and freedom must be done under the rule of law.
                  
                    Taken together, even though I expressed a similar view following major demonstrations in Hong Kong more than 11 years ago (Wen Wei Po, Feb 2, 2004), it is unfortunate that such protests have become even more aggressive and at times unlawful as well as negatively impacting the lives of Hong Kong residents. It must be remembered that the rule of law must be independent of any political, economic or personal interests for Hong Kong and its people to have a better tomorrow.
                    
                      P.S.: On Sept 11, 2015, news came about the most comprehensive general election in Singapore's history. It resulted in a landslide victory for the People's Action party led by Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, the son of Singapore's founder Lee Kuan Yew. For many years, many people from within and outside Singapore have criticized the relative lack of democracy and freedom in Singapore. This election demonstrated unequivocally that if the people are satisfied with their government and the rule of law, they are willing to compromise in the area of democracy - which, as I pointed out, is a complex and diverse issue anyway.
                      
                        The author is chairman of the World Eye Organization and was a member of the US President's Committee on the Arts and Humanities during President George H.W. Bush's administration.
                        
(HK Edition 09/15/2015 page9)

