
Ideally, candidates for the post of Chief Executive (CE) need not be prescreened by a largely pro-Beijing Nominating Committee (NC). It should only be necessary for candidates to meet all the legal requirements to stand for election and demonstrate sufficient support to have a chance to win the election. 
However, Hong Kong may not be ready for such an ideal nominating process. The architects of the Basic Law introduced the NC as a safeguard. The "Occupy Central" movement shows they were wise to do so. 
The occupiers, by defying the specific terms laid out in the Basic Law and even challenging the legitimacy of the central government, have shown that a sizable number of Hong Kong people are opposed to Beijing. Many of these people keep referring to past mistakes made by former national leaders. They refuse to accept the political system on the mainland. If someone with such inclinations were to be elected CE, things could become very messy for Beijing. Rather than dealing with such an outcome, Beijing is wise to preclude such people from running for the post of CE. 



It is pointless blaming the occupiers or the "pan-democrats" for refusing to accept the current political system on the mainland and for hating the Communist Party of China (CPC). This loathing of the CPC has historical roots, and cannot be dismissed off hand. It will not simply disappear. Many Hong Kong people are schooled in the belief that democracy must mean party rotation and competition among parties. One-party rule is to them, by definition, not democracy. If this is the way they feel it must be accepted in the hope that in time their thinking will change. 
This is why it is so important for Beijing to uphold the rule of law and contain abuses of power and effectively serve all people of the nation in an enlightened and civilized manner. The facts will then speak for themselves. If the existing system is seen to serve the interests of the country better than Western democracies serve the interests of their citizens, then the time will come when people's thinking will change. Beijing needs to show Hong Kong people, and the world, that its rule is enlightened and not authoritarian - concerned with the public interest, not vested interests. 
Until such time, however, Hong Kong will not be ready for universal suffrage without prescreening by a largely pro-Beijing NC. The "Occupy" movement has made this all too clear. It is highly likely that Beijing will maintain effective prescreening until the Hong Kong public and its politicians stop challenging the political system on the mainland. 
I am sure there are "pan-democrats" who love Hong Kong and love the nation and who want to run for the CE post to serve Hong Kong well. But their obstructive tactics and defiant attitudes only undermine their intentions. If they want to run for the post of CE, they should respect the Basic Law and the "One Country, Two Systems" principal. They must accept the political realities on the mainland and they must accept the resolutions of the nation's top legislative body - the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC). They need to demonstrate to the NC that they are trustworthy. If they play tough, Beijing will play tough. They will then effectively disqualify themselves from standing for election to the post of CE. They will force Beijing to indefinitely maintain prescreening. 
It is understandably difficult for the "pan-democrats" to compromise, given that they have told the public that they would defy the NPCSC until the NPCSC changed its decision. But they should realize that the NPCSC is not going to change, however tough they play. They only end up hurting themselves and hurting others. At this crucial juncture, acting with courage to win the trust of Beijing is more important than being bound by political "morality". There is actually a greater political morality: to truly serve Hong Kong and the nation and not serve one's ego. 
Maybe there is little room for maneuver within the framework already laid out in the Aug 31 resolution. However Hong Kong must move forward, regardless of how small each step may be. At the same time, it is wise for Beijing to support every friendly move on the part of the "pan-democrats". Beijing should also continue its ongoing efforts to establish the rule of law on the mainland and to crack down on corrupt officials. Over time, Beijing will win the hearts of Hong Kong people. There will then be no need to distinguish between the so-called pro-establishment camp and the "pan-democrat" camp, and no need for any prescreening. 

(HK Edition 01/14/2015 page1)

