







 
Students make drawings of the floral arch in the garden specially designed to celebrate the 25th anniversary of Hong Kong SAR Basic Law's promulgation. Provided to China Daily
The refusal by some people in Hong Kong to admit that the central government has the SAR's best interests at heart when introducing constitutional reform is stopping the city from progressing toward greater democracy. 
Basic Law drafters and veteran law practitioners have proved that these people -mainly members of the opposition camp - are wrong, by revisiting the history of constitutional reform in Hong Kong. 
Last December, a British parliamentary delegation planned to come to Hong Kong to launch an inquiry into the current situation regarding implementation of the Sino-British Joint Declaration. 
Chairman of the UK Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee Richard Ottaway claimed Beijing would breach the terms of the joint declaration if the Hong Kong government's universal suffrage plan is based on the National People's Congress Standing Committee's decision on Aug 31 last year. 
Ottaway claimed this decision was slowing down progress toward universal suffrage in 2017, and the British government, as one of the document's signatories, still has a responsibility to Hong Kong. 
Both the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the SAR government refuted this argument, affirming that the significance of the declaration had ended when Chinese sovereignty was resumed in 1997. 
Alan Paul, the British side's senior representative on the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group, witnessed the historical negotiations before the handover. 
Paul refuted the British claim of responsibility. In a written submission to the UK Parliament, he said it in fact had no basis for the "assumption that references to elections in the joint declaration represent a commitment by both the Chinese government and the British government that full democracy would eventually be introduced into Hong Kong as part of the overall handover settlement". 



He further removed any doubts by saying that "the UK's negotiating horizon did not extend beyond 30 June 1997" and "universal suffrage was not on the agenda". 
The declaration stated that the Chief Executive would be appointed by the central government on the basis of results of "elections" or "consultations" held locally. 
On the other hand, the Basic Law, drafted by Chinese legal experts, goes further in Article 45, stipulating that the ultimate goal is to elect the city's leader by universal suffrage. 
In his book A Study on the Hong Kong Basic Law Drafting Materials, Basic Law expert Simon Lee Hoey re-examined the historical papers to learn more about the drafting process of the city's mini-constitution. 
According to the documents, the word "universal suffrage" appeared in seven of the nine drafts for Article 45. The paper showed that up to the fourth draft, there were still four election methods listed - although this was already much fewer than the original 20 brought up for deliberation. 
Basic Law drafter Tam Yiu-chung was then a young representative from the labor sector who joined 22 other Hong Kong representatives in the Basic Law Drafting Committee. Tam recalled that after three consultations in Hong Kong, the committee decided to put "universal suffrage" into the Basic Law. This is despite the fact the joint declaration never envisioned this for Hong Kong. 
Another drafter, one of the 36 mainland representatives and veteran law expert, Lian Xisheng, told China Daily that choosing the CE by consultation, as stated in the declaration, was briefly discussed. Then the focus turned to using an election to pick the CE. 
In fact, Tam revealed, there were few disputes over universal suffrage during a drafting process of five years. He added that "public nomination", currently demanded by the opposition camp, was never mentioned during the drafting process. 
All articles would need two-thirds majority support from the 59 drafters from both the mainland and Hong Kong before being written into the Basic Law, Tam explained. 
Lian, a former law professor at China University of Political Science and Law, said that universal suffrage as an ultimate goal was written in the Basic Law because Hong Kong had no democracy during the colonial era. 
"Democracy cannot be achieved in one go," said Lian. 
Article 159 of Basic Law stipulates the ways to amend the city's mini-constitution. Lian said this was a prescient move by the drafters to show that universal suffrage should be achieved in a gradual process as stated in Article 45. 
The opposition camp was therefore wrong to allege that passing the electoral reform proposal would be equivalent to "pocketing it forever". This can be clearly seen from examining these legal documents. 
Hong Kong's first-ever universal suffrage proposal will be put to a vote in the 70-strong Legislative Council this week. With a view to blocking its passage in the legislature, the opposition camp claims that the government's reform package will introduce fake universal suffrage without "public nomination". 
Hence, the camp, with 27 key votes in the council, has pledged to veto the reform in a bloc vote. 
Barrister and Senior Counsel Alan Hoo Hong-ching called the opposition camp's argument, which equates universal suffrage with "public nomination", "a complete sham". 
Among the 193 countries in the United Nations, Hoo said, only three exercise "public nomination". In most Western countries, including the United Kingdom and United States, the nomination right is in the hands of political parties. 
"By their (opposition's) standard, the US presidential election is also a fake universal suffrage," Hoo said. 
"They (the opposition) are approaching it from the purpose of control. They want to make sure that one of their candidates must be there. That can't be right. How can democracy mean that one particular party must always be there," Hoo noted. 
In Hong Kong's case, Article 45 of the Basic Law handed the nominating right for the CE to a well-represented Nominating Committee. The government's reform package, if passed, will see the city's 5 million eligible voters casting their votes for their leaders for the first time in Hong Kong's history. 
Tam Yiu-chung, legislator and former president of the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong, said the idea of putting the nominating right in the hands of the Nominating Committee is to avoid problems in a situation that the central government might have to refuse to appoint a CE chosen in an election. 
Tam said this was because the CE is a vital post, which must not be filled by people who are not up to the job. 
stushadow@chinadailyhk.com 



(HK Edition 06/15/2015 page4)

