The Public Opinion Programme (POP) of the University of Hong Kong recently conducted a public opinion poll. It found that 56 percent of respondents believed the Legislative Council (LegCo) should pass the government's constitutional reforms based on the decision reached on Aug 31, 2014 (the "8/31 decision") by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC), the country's top legislature. The poll not only showed majority support for universal suffrage according to the Basic Law and the relevant decisions of the top legislature, but a 27 percent edge over those favoring other options. More importantly, respondents who favor the passing of electoral reform package were 65 percent more than those having opposite view, which accounted for only 34 percent of all respondents. During elections, Western media often publish similar polls as indicative of voting trends. Typically any party that commands an advantage of over 50 percent more support than its rivals will usually win the election by a big margin.
The POP test also found even more public support for the government's political reforms (64 percent) over the opposition (23 percent) if the government is committed to introducing a greater level of democracy in the 2022 Chief Executive election.
The institution that commissioned the poll explained that the two-day exercise was conducted on Jan 7, immediately after the SAR government launched the second round of its public consultation on constitutional reform. The poll excluded details of the consultation paper, so it could not reflect public opinion regarding the revised version of the constitutional reforms. This gives reason to believe the government can win more support for its electoral reforms if it pays greater attention to its efforts at consultation.
The "pan-democrats" were not willing to accept POP's findings. Alan Leung Kah-kit, head of the Civic Party said last week that the new poll showed the public had not been adequately "immunized" against the government's "virus". Leung's comments show he is denying reality.
One of the reasons certain "pan-democrats" believe the new POP poll results fell short of their expectations is that "Occupy" affected the livelihoods of many. Consequently, there was a rise in popular support for the government. But this was not the main reason. Why? Because, if the opposition real stood for "true democracy", it would have been able to regain its popular support after the end of "Occupy". But this has not happened. The "pan-democrats" must quickly produce a convincing explanation.
"Occupy" failed to achieve its declared goals. It also exposed the true "pan-democrat" colors. It was an abusive, anti-democratic campaign in disregards of the popular will. Moreover, the unlawful behavior of the occupiers prompted many local residents to carefully consider the real essence of democracy. They also considered the significance of the NPCSC's 8/31 decision as well as the importance of the Basic Law in preserving the stability and prosperity of Hong Kong. Many who did not fully understand the 8/31 decision did realize the importance of the rule of law and the difference between democracy and populism. That is why more members of the public supported the government's constitutional reforms than have before. It was the negative impact of "Occupy" which persuaded many people to withdraw their support for the "pan-democrats".
Last Friday, Albert Ho Chun-yan, a leading member of the Democratic Party, announced that he planned to resign as a lawmaker. Ho plans to stage the plot after he and fellow opposition lawmakers blocked the government's constitutional reform plans in an effort to trigger a by-election - or "de facto referendum". This is an attempt to show popular support for overturning the top legislature's 8/31 decision and for the electoral reforms they favor.
However Ho knows this will never work. He admitted that he had decided to resign after the vote because the "pan-democrats" would have insufficient votes to block the constitutional reform package. So Ho is not completely in denial. He understands that a majority of Hong Kong residents oppose him and his supporters. 
I hope Ho will follow the example of the late Szeto Wah (1931-2011), a founding father of the Democratic Party. Though he was viciously attacked by radical "pan-democrat" members for his "betrayal", he won the respect of the public. A true democrat should have no problem choosing the wishes of the public over those of political prejudice.
The author is a veteran journalist based in Hong Kong.
 
(HK Edition 01/19/2015 page11)
 
