


      Leung Kwok-leung believes that Hong Kong people won't trade off the city's prosperity and stability for short-term political gains
      
        Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying recently met with political and business dignitaries at Government House, where he shared his views on some events that took place in Hong Kong before and after the illegal "Occupy Central" movement.
        
          He noted that on July 2 last year the police detained 511 people, who had participated in a "dress rehearsal" for "Occupy", but five months later during final operations to remove the blockade in Central in mid-December only 249 people were detained. A further 909 people chose to show police their personal identification cards and leave rather than wait to be detained. He believed the contrasting numbers indicate the great majority of Hong Kong residents are law-abiding citizens who cherish the rule of law. Further proof of this can be found in the fact that Benny Tai's predicted scenario of "10,000 people turning themselves in to the authorities, overcrowding police stations, courtrooms and prisons" never materialized, noted Leung.
          
            Tai hoped to "inspire" Hong Kong residents to violate laws and assume collective responsibility, only to ultimately see his "bubble" burst.
            
              Leung's words expressed the truth: The great majority of Hong Kong society wishes to maintain prosperity and stability. Hong Kong people appreciate that their hard-earned prosperity depends on lasting stability protected by the rule of law. This core belief will stop attempts by hard-line opposition politicians, protesters and external forces to bring turmoil to the SAR.
              
                There is no doubt Hong Kong people love democracy and want a well-rounded democratic system - but not at the expense of prosperity and stability. The opposition has been trying to foster political uncertainty to serve its own interests. They have been trying to force the central government to grant their unconstitutional demands for power in the name of democracy. This kind of subversive conduct can never win majority support because it will destroy Hong Kong's prosperity and stability. That is why they will always fail in the end.
                
                  To better understand this, let's consider the mainland. Deng Xiaoping said in the 1980s that "peace and development" was the main pursuit of today's world. This conclusion was the basis for Deng's reforms and strategy to open up the country. This resulted in unprecedented development. It has changed not only China but also propelled the global economy forward. The ongoing reforms and liberalization have turned the mainland into the second-largest economy in the world.
                  
                    Despite tremendous pressure from problems at home and abroad, a staunch belief in "peace and development" always guided the reforms. The liberalization policies were ultimately successful in overcoming all the challenges.
                    
                      China's achievements over the past 30 years demonstrate that any attempt at defying mainstream consensus will fail, no matter how fierce it may appear or how righteous it may seem.
                      
                        Now let's return to Hong Kong's problems. The central government has kept its promises since the handover in letting the SAR maintain its capitalist system "unchanged for 50 years", "Hong Kong people governing Hong Kong" and a high degree of autonomy. All this is enshrined in the Basic Law, not to mention the right to select the Chief Executive (CE) and legislative councilors by universal suffrage at some point. One may ask what assurances Beijing was given in return for those promises. The truth is that prosperity and stability has always been what mainstream Hong Kong people want most. With this conviction we are certain Hong Kong people can and will keep the SAR in good shape going forward.
                        
                          The Basic Law, and the National People's Congress Standing Committee's (NPCSC) decision on the method for selecting the CE by universal suffrage, were both designed to maintain Hong Kong's prosperity and stability. That is why the CE must be a patriot who loves the nation as much Hong Kong and can never represent foreign interests. This is absolutely essential for the SAR's prosperity and stability as well as for the security of Hong Kong and the nation.
                          
                            Electoral reform is now at a critical stage. The central government has reiterated that the electoral reform plan must be formulated according to the Basic Law and relevant NPCSC decisions. It has also emphasized that there will be room for future modifications to the reform. Therefore, the best choice for the opposition is to accept the reforms while they can. This is the popular consensus of Hong Kong society.
                            
                              Leung has commented that illegal acts similar to "Occupy" could reoccur when the SAR government submits the constitutional reform plan to the Legislative Council later this year. Both the SAR government and police force will be ready to handle such illegal behavior according to law. That said, he still hopes the opposition will abandon their non-cooperation strategy and make a "beautiful turn-around" to comply with mainstream popular consensus.
                              
                                The author is a veteran journalist based in Hong Kong.
                                
(HK Edition 03/25/2015 page10)

