
The event surrounding the walkout by pro-establishment legislators may have hogged all the headlines but, in some ways, the most ridiculous thing that happened during the debate on electoral reform is what took place immediately afterwards, when 27 supposedly "pro-democracy" legislators (plus Leung Ka-lau of the medical functional constituency) vetoed a proposal that would have given 5 million Hong Kong voters the right to elect the next Chief Executive by universal suffrage. 
Now, I understand that the "pan-democrats" had some genuine concerns about the mechanism proposed in the government's electoral reform package, notably the pre-screening of CE candidates by the Nominating Committee (NC) and the make-up of the NC itself. But the fact remains that the package represented a very definite "step ahead to democracy", to quote Starry Lee Wai-king, chairperson of the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong. So, in my view, this was undoubtedly an opportunity missed. 
And yet, in the aftermath of the vote, there was a lot of talk of "victory" in the opposition camp. But if this is victory, I wonder, what on earth does defeat look like? Because the undeniable truth here is that nothing has been won; all that's happened is that a piece of legislation offering genuine, if limited, progress has been blocked by an organized and determined opposition. 
Now, you could argue that this whole process has actually been a victory for democracy, not only in that the "pan-democrats" got what they wanted but also in that an important government-sponsored bill was subjected to scrutiny by a democratically elected body. But was the outcome really a good thing for the people of Hong Kong? Is it really in our interests to prolong a political stalemate that's already blighting our society? And how much better would it be if negotiations over electoral reform could somehow be kick-started again now? 
In his speech before the LegCo vote, Ronnie Tong Ka-wah chided his colleagues in the "pro-democracy" camp for having neglected to unite behind a reform package of their own. The implication here is that had the "pan-democrats" been more pro-active, they might have been able to persuade the central government to embrace a package that satisfied not only its concerns over security but also their demands for "legitimacy". 
As it was, the "pan-democrats" adopted an oppositional approach which stifled dialogue and made compromise almost impossible. "The pan-democrats used the "Occupy Central" protests to press Beijing and, in return, we got the Aug 31 framework for reform," said Tong. 
And yet, even within the Aug 31 framework, why didn't the "pan-democrats" just say "yes" to electoral reform? After all, they had nothing to lose. Even if their worst fears had materialized and "pocket it first" had turned out to mean "pocket it for life", the situation would still have been preferable to the one we find ourselves in now - a situation where, unless an agreement can be reached soon on a revised electoral reform package (which seems highly unlikely), the next CE will be elected by only 1,200 people. 
Surely, then, it would have been much better to have given the proposed political blueprint a chance. That way, even in the worst-case scenario, we would have ended up with a CE election organized according to the principle of "one person, one vote". And who knows? This may have turned out to be the first step in an ongoing journey on the road to democracy. 
As Liberal Party Chairman Felix Chung Kwok-pan pointed out in the LegCo debate, implementing universal suffrage for the 2017 CE election would have represented a significant step forward for Hong Kong, as it would have meant that all CE candidates were accountable first and foremost to the people of Hong Kong. This, in turn, would have resulted in a marked increase in autonomy for the SAR within the overall framework of "One Country, Two Systems". 
Fortunately, however, the rejection of the constitutional reform plans doesn't represent the death of democracy in Hong Kong. In fact, democracy here is alive and kicking. Coming up in November is the district council elections, and that will be followed by the LegCo election next year. Let's hope that both these elections will serve as a catalyst for constructive debate on not only electoral reform but also the many economic and livelihood issues afflicting us now. 
Too much time has been wasted bickering about electoral reform. Now is the time to focus on boosting the economy so that we can build a future that benefits Hong Kong people of all political stripes. If we can do that, we may just find that the issue of electoral reform ends up taking care of itself. 




(HK Edition 06/30/2015 page11)

