


      Prevailing sentiment over prospects for Hong Kong's constitutional reform is gloomy after the meeting between three senior central government officials and opposition lawmakers in Shenzhen on Sunday. After the two sides emerged from the four-hour meeting, divided as ever, some people in Hong Kong felt let down by the central government.
      
        There is little doubt these people are more sympathetic to the "pan-democrats". They expected Beijing to make some concessions. The opposition legislators, on the other hand, had no unrealistic expectations. After all, Beijing had made its stance on Hong Kong's electoral reform very clear well before the Sunday meeting. There was no reason to think the central government might give in at the last minute to make the opposition camp feel better.
        
          It has been well-known since the Chinese government began negotiations with its British counterpart over Hong Kong in the 1980s that Beijing never wavers on matters of principle. This is especially true in regard to national sovereignty, security and development issues. Anyone who believes the central government will let radical politicians decide Hong Kong's constitutional development is either misguided or delusional. This is because the latter has consistently demonstrated an obsession with sabotaging the lawful administration of the SAR government. If the "pan-democrats" feel "wronged" by the public then they have only themselves to blame. They have boxed themselves into a corner for all the wrong reasons.
          
            Some people may argue that the "pan-democrats" have been just as firm about their principles as the central government and deserve better treatment. This may seem right to the "pro-democracy" crowd, but they are forgetting the most decisive factor in this debate: Popular support. I don't mean to say that the opposition parties have overlooked public support. Indeed, they never fail to mention it. Their problem is they cannot rally enough public support these days. They keep releasing fabricated poll results to the public.
            
              It is widely known the opposition parties and their foreign allies have been doing everything they can to demonize the Communist Party of China (CPC). But their delinquent tendencies and illegal antics such as "Occupy Central" are hardly examples of democratic behavior. The CPC has clearly done an outstanding job leading a nation of nearly 1.4 billion to greater prosperity. This cannot be said of many ruling parties in democratic societies today. Critics can say what they like, but they cannot stop foreign countries cooperating with China - which is a rising power.
              
                I believe the decisive factor in all this will be the "national interest". Isn't this the same with other countries? It is a great shame opposition politicians have ignored the most important fundamentals for democracy - national security and stability. Given their twisted logic and undemocratic behavior, opposition politicians are doing themselves a huge disservice by clinging to nonsense like "real universal suffrage".
                
                  They have dwindling support from the public for their unconstitutional demands. This is mainly due to their aggressive behavior. These have shown scant regard to the interests of Hong Kong society. Therefore, the opposition camp does not have much time left to decide if they really want to take away the rights of 5 million Hong Kong voters' to elect the next Chief Executive by universal suffrage. The crucial Legislative Council vote is scheduled for June 17. I will not be surprised if the opposition camp decides to make another desperate attempt at provoking the central government as well as the SAR government. Their actions will no doubt be illegal.
                  
                    The diehard anti-Beijing elements in the opposition have already threatened to "reoccupy" public spaces adjacent to the LegCo Complex on June 17. With memories of the failed illegal "Occupy" campaign still fresh, such a move will only show people again they are betraying public trust to save their own skins. They have to prove they are worth the cash "donations" they have been getting from foreign supporters.
                    
                      But the opposition parties must surely realize that their veto of the reform package may convince many voters not to support their candidates in district council elections in November and LegCo election next year. They still have many "cheerleaders" who will continue to support them. But is a gamble like this really worth the risk? Are they absolutely sure such an abuse of power is the best way to achieve anything?
                      
                        The author is a current affairs commentator.
                        
(HK Edition 06/05/2015 page11)

