
The "Four Comprehensives" strategic layout mapped out by China's top leader Xi Jinping, a comprehensive elaboration of the overall framework for China's future administration and development, will guide the modernizing of the nation's governance system and capability.
They are also of great significance to global governance ideology. The "End of History" and "Clash of Civilization" theories dominated mainstream governance ideas in the West for a time after the Cold War. Under the influence of the "End of History" theory, which believes Western political and economic systems have become the final form of the human society, Western theories and ideas have pervaded the world in recent years, causing many countries to loose a grip on financial derivatives and finally contributing to the 2008 global financial crisis. The proponents of the "Clash of Civilizations" theory claim that the main contradiction of the international order is the clash of different civilizations, and under its influence the anti-terror war led by the United States has swept across the world. As a result, the US has got mired a quagmire in the Middle East and the terrorist group Islamic State has emerged as big threat to global security.
However, these two theories became less valid after the eruption of the global financial crisis and Western countries' implementation of emergency measures for self-rescue, which ignored the pressing need to create new and systematic global governance ideas. The "Four Comprehensives" not only offer a guide to realizing the common dream of Chinese people, they offer new vitality to global governance theory.
To comprehensively build an all-round well-off society is the grand goal China has vowed to realize by 2020. According to the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of China in 2012, to comprehensively build a moderately well-off society, China will not only work for continuous and healthy economic development and raising people's living conditions, it will also promote continuous expansion of democracy and remarkably build up its cultural soft power. In particular, the country seeks to achieve significant progress in the construction of an ecological civilization that features the sustainable use of resources and an environmentally friendly society. Such a broad governance blueprint shows China's confidence it can realize the Chinese Dream.




Previous Page
1 2 Next Page

Previous Page
1 2 Next Page



<!--
function turnpage(page){  document.all("div_currpage").innerHTML = document.all("div_page_roll"+page).innerHTML;}
-->


