
To commemorate the 25th anniversary of the adoption of the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, the Chinese Association of Hong Kong and Macau Studies held a symposium in Beijing. Zhang Rongshun, legislative affairs commission vice-chairman of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC), said Hong Kong people should understand and implement the Basic Law as it would safeguard their own interests. 
It is vital to Hong Kong's constitutional development for the significance of the Basic Law to be re-emphasized. Its importance has been obvious during the political disputes of the past 17 years - particularly those regarding political reform. Some politicians have intentionally misled the public into believing the Basic Law is some kind of constraint upon people's lives in Hong Kong. Things would be so much easier if there was a better understanding of the SAR's "mini constitution". 
I was an advisor to the government during the process of legislating for the Basic Law. My experience convinced me of its relevance, coherence and strength. 
The Basic Law was drafted by a committee of 59 Hong Kong and mainland representatives. A Basic Law Consultative Committee formed purely of Hong Kong people (180 members) was established in 1985 to canvass the views of Hong Kong people. Divergent opinions were also considered during the drafting process. 
The Basic Law is based on the opinions of Hong Kong people. Its objective is to ensure that Hong Kong's capitalist system and way of life remain unchanged for at least 50 years, and that the SAR enjoys a high degree of autonomy by virtue of the successful implementation of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle. Therefore, the Basic Law is definitely not a constraint on life in Hong Kong. Rather, it allows the SAR to enjoy executive, legislative and independent judicial power. If this amulet is ever lost, Hong Kong people will suffer from the resulting social instability. 
To make Hong Kong people, particularly young people, aware of this, more Basic Law education is needed. Before Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying delivered his annual Policy Address, in these commentary pieces I have suggested that aside from promoting the Basic Law, the education system should also explain Basic Law. The government should consider including a form of national education in the school curriculum. This would help people gain a better understanding of our country, the history of Hong Kong, the origin and drafting process of the Basic Law, as well as the relationship between "One Country" and "Two Systems". 
The government is poised to submit its proposed electoral reform package to the Legislative Council (LegCo) for the implementation of universal suffrage. But this needs to be endorsed by a two-thirds majority of all members of the LegCo if universal suffrage is to be implemented in the SAR. 
At present, opposition members are still attempting to derail the reform process. They are putting up barriers by deliberately misinterpreting the Basic Law. They should remember the statement by the Hong Kong Bar Association last October, "Whatever views one may now have about the constitutional regime laid down by the drafters of the Basic Law 24 years ago, the inescapable fact is that any discussion of electoral progress must be conducted within the framework of what is constitutionally permitted." 
Some Hong Kong politicians have rejected the legal framework for universal suffrage established by the NPCSC in its Aug 31 decision. They claim this framework is undemocratic. But they are threatening to thwart an important aspiration of the central and SAR governments, as well as the majority of Hong Kong people: to realize universal suffrage in the SAR in 2017. 
Most Hong Kong citizens want to see universal suffrage implemented. To advance democracy in Hong Kong, the government should step up its efforts in explaining the Basic Law. The Education Bureau should consider adding relevant courses to school curriculums. This could explain facts to students. This would ensure that political discourse in the future is more rational and realistic. 




(HK Edition 04/08/2015 page9)

