
Ronald Ng says the example of Finland after World War II and its pragmatic approach to Russia offers important lessons for HK in its relationship with the mainland 
Finland for a long time had a chequered relationship with Russia, and in World War II it actually fought on the side of Germany against Russia. But at the Paris Peace Treaty of 1947, it managed to retain its independence and maintained its system of parliamentary democracy. However, realpolitik dictated that it must not offend the then Soviet Union. It signed an Agreement of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance with the Soviet Union in 1948 and it never opposed the Soviet Union in its foreign policy. There was also considerable self-censorship in its mass media. The term "Finlandization" was coined and first used in Germany to describe that situation where a small country, in order to maintain its sovereignty, has to behave in certain manner so as not to irritate a powerful neighbor. 
During the years of the cold war, this was how Finland acted toward the Soviet Union, and Finland was a sovereign independent nation. 
Although Hong Kong is not an independent country, it has a high degree of autonomy, with its own legal system, its own currency and financial policy, its own rules in regulating its borders, issues its own passports and even signs trade agreements with foreign countries. But the central government takes care of its foreign policy and defense. 



Recently, former chief executive Tung Chee-hwa told a press conference that even members of the opposition might have a chance to become Chief Executive. He said the only people who do not have a chance are those who oppose the Communist Party of China (CPC). But if one thinks about this logically and realistically then isn't this obvious? Finland, an independent sovereign nation, for reasons of realpolitik, understood how it should behave. In order for its citizens to enjoy the quality of life they have in the country, and be independent of the Soviet Union, the nation became "Finlandized". Isn't it obvious that Hong Kong should learn from Finland? 
In an earlier article, I asked the question what is democracy for? If one accepts it as being government by the people, of the people and for the people, the conclusion then must be that democracy is really for the purpose of having a government which can respond to the needs of the people. Hong Kong is a part of China, and its economic life is closely linked to the mainland. Would it be so awful if Hong Kong also became Finlandized? 
The more the "pan-democrats" decry the actions of Beijing, the more Beijing would be suspicious of the "pan-democrats" and require more rules and regulations to ensure that its position will not be endangered. Beijing fears Hong Kong being used as a base for the subversion of its body politic. It is unwise for the "pan-democrats" to visit the US and Britain and to solicit their support. Doing that not only raises eyebrows in Beijing, and arguably even legitimate suspicions. Predictably, Beijing's displeasure over such gratuitous provocation always increases. To put a stop to this vicious cycle, bridges of trust must be built between the "pan-democrats" and Beijing. 
Politicians in Hong Kong need to regard their jobs as that of promoting the welfare of the people of the SAR, instead of promoting democracy in Hong Kong and the mainland. Learn from Finland - don't comment on events on the mainland. 
The important question one has to ask regarding the proposed reforms governing the election of the new Chief Executive in 2017 is not whether this is "real democracy" or not, whatever the word "real democracy" means. The crucial question that should be asked is would that system allow Hong Kong people to elect a person who will prioritize the welfare of the people and not meddle in issues outside of his/her brief. Likewise, Hong Kong politicians should learn the lessons of Finland and refrain from intruding into affairs outside their jurisdiction. Most of all, it should stop their anti-CPC stance as it would most certainly lead to no good either in Hong Kong or the mainland. They should focus on keeping their own house in order. 

(HK Edition 05/26/2015 page9)

