


      The top administrator of the Anglican Church in Hong Kong expressed deep concerns about antagonism displayed by some people to the central government.
      
        Reverend Peter Douglas Koon Ho-ming, secretary-general of Hong Kong Sheng Kung Hui and an adviser to the Our Hong Kong Foundation, supports the government's reform proposals. He told a radio interview on Monday the package was taking Hong Kong in the right direction.
        
          Koon said he was confident the "one person, one vote" franchise would open up opportunities for further changes to the nomination process.
          
            He also stressed that the Nominating Committee was prescribed in the Basic Law. Therefore, the committee could make decisions on candidates after approval by a simple or absolute majority of its 1,200 members.
            
              He appealed to young people to learn more about the history of Hong Kong. Then, they could get a better picture of the city's progress toward democracy.
              
                "We didn't even have a choice (of the governor) under colonial government, let alone an election method," Koon recalled.
                
                  He also said the impasse on electoral reform was caused by tactics which were "overly radical". Koon was a vocal opponent of last year's "Occupy Central" campaign.
                  
                    He recognized that interaction between Hong Kong and Beijing was not a simple question of obedience. He said things might change in future if society behaves in a more rational manner.
                    
                      Koon, after talking to a student representative who burned a copy of the Basic Law at a public rally last Thursday, said it was unfair for opposition supporters to blame the central government for everything.
                      
                        For example, the problem of pregnant mainland women coming to Hong Kong was the result of a previous court ruling which failed to seek interpretation from the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, he noted.
                        
                          Koon added that in some ways the "One Country, Two Systems" policy had worked "too well".
                          
                            He also explained that his views did not represent the official stance of Sheng Kung Hui. Nonetheless, his support for the reform proposals remains significant. Religious leaders in Hong Kong rarely choose sides in politics.
                            
                              The Bishop of Hong Kong's Catholic Church, Cardinal John Tong Hon, wrote in late May appealing for all sides to develop with a mutually acceptable reform proposal. He also led prayers, urging lawmakers to vote on the reform package based on their conscience.
                              
                                kahon@chinadailyhk.com
                                (HK Edition 06/09/2015 page4)

