
With the majority of Hong Kong people having unmistakably voiced their strong aspiration for universal suffrage in 2017, the "pan-democrat" legislators are morally obligated to weigh their decision to veto the SAR government's proposed electoral reform plan. A roster of recent opinion polls have shown that the majority of citizens support a package based on the legal framework laid down by nation's top legislature. 
In the latest survey conducted by New Territories Association of Societies between late March and early April, over 80 percent of the respondents expressed their hope for achieving "one person, one vote" in 2017, and more than 60 percent of those surveyed said they wanted lawmakers to endorse an electoral package based on the Aug 31 decision of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. 
After ample public debates in two rounds of consultation over the past several months, the results of the opinion polls have clearly illustrated the realistic aspiration of the majority of Hong Kong people. It would be anti-democratic for the minority to continue to disregard the aspiration of the majority and deprive their right to universal suffrage. 
The democratic mechanism of check and balance that requires a two-thirds majority in the Legislative Council to pass the reform resolution is essentially intended to protect the interests of the minority against potential abuse by the majority. 
By voting down the proposed electoral reform plan, the "pan-democrat" lawmakers will not be safeguarding the interests of the minority. Rather, they are undermining the overall well-being of the society because democratic development in the SAR will be derailed. With the implementation of universal suffrage being indefinitely delayed, the ensuing political bickering would only further divide Hong Kong society. 
Financial Secretary John Tsang Chun-wah did not overstate when he warned that a failure to push through the proposed constitutional reform for achieving universal suffrage in 2017 would prove to be the turning point of Hong Kong's fortune. This notion, shared by many others in the city, is warranted and well-explained by the fact that Hong Kong has built its economic success on social stability. 
If the "pan-democrat" camp in Hong Kong is genuinely committed to democracy, as it has always claimed to be, it can't morally defend its decision to defy the will of the majority. 




(HK Edition 04/20/2015 page10)

