








Howard Li, regional co-chair of China of Committee of 100 gives the award to the scholarship recipient Liang Qingxue, student from Shanghai Jiao Tong University on the ceremony. Gao Erqiang / China Daily





To pass on the spirit of excellence and achievements among Chinese Americans, hundreds of members, scholarship awarders and university representatives gathered to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Committee of 100 Leadership Scholarship Program in Shanghai on Tuesday.

During the whole day celebration, 28 students received the scholarship and became the newest members of a group of next generation leaders. Those students a re selected based on their aptitude for leadership, commitment to public service, and record of academic excellence. Current students are based in a wide diversity of academic fields, and alumni of the program go on to pioneer progress in a range of professional disciplines.
After the ceremony, all the guests were offered the chance to attend two panel sessions held by experienced members on the topics of leadership and innovation entrepreneurship and US-China relations and new generation. They also participated in a mentoring program to have face-to-face communication with existing members of Committee of 100.
"The young leaders from US and China will play important roles to improve the civil democracy between two countries," said Herman Li, the acting chairman of Committee of 100 at the ceremony.
The Committee of 100 Leadership Scholarship Program was established in 2005 with the goal of recognizing and fostering the leadership potential of young Chinese students. The program rewards and recognizes those students who demonstrate excellence while encouraging candidates to embrace a greater global vision of success. So far, over 200 outstanding postgraduate and doctoral students from 14 universities across the country have been recognized as the recipients of the scholarship.
"Committee of 100 has been keen to promote the constructive conversation and relationship among people and leaders between US and China by launching the scholarship program, which will affect the US-China relation eventually," said Li.
Established in 1990, the Committee of 100 has a rich legacy of harnessing the power of its distinguished membership to address significant, complex issues pertaining to Americans of Chinese descent and US-China relations.
Now the Committee of 100 is comprised of over 150 distinguished Chinese Americans from arts, business, academia, public service, and the science. The membership organization of Chinese Americans dedicated to provide leadership and act as a constructive force in the dual mission of promoting the full participation and inclusion of all Chinese Americans in American society and the constructive relations between the people and leaders of the US and China.
yuran@chinadaily.com.cn
