
It came as no surprise when an open-top campaign bus carrying the chief secretary and other government officials on Saturday to promote the constitutional reform package ran into chaos provoked by a few radicals, ending up in scuffles and arrests. 
There is a worrying trend lately that a handful of political agitators are bent on sabotaging the government's publicity campaign. These unruly ruffians show no interest in communicating with anyone who holds a different political view to theirs. They seem to take delight in verbally and, sometimes, physically, abusing their opponents. 
As Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying pointed out on Sunday, protesters should take a moment to reflect on their unsavory tactics. Their rowdy behaviors not only disturb other people's daily life, but also sabotage the implementation of universal suffrage in Hong Kong. 
The bus trip and other events over the weekend marked the start of large-scale publicity campaigns by rival political camps to drum up public support for, or against, the electoral reform package released by the government last Wednesday. Many media observers and academics have said they expected that the backing of more than 60 percent of Hong Kong people would be enough to persuade the opposition to endorse the reform package. But others said that they believed "pan-democrats" would only be swayed to vote in favor of the package when public support exceeds 70 percent. 
But a serious question should be raised here: Does public opinion really matter? To what extent would the debate on political reform rely on public opinion? A case in point is that in 2005, "pan-democrats" voted down the SAR government's proposal for the 2007-08 elections although nearly 60 percent of the public backed the package. More recently, radical lawmaker Wong Yuk-man openly stated that even if public opinion polls show two-thirds support for the package, he would still veto it. 
As such, mobilizing public opinion might not be enough to force the opposition to change their mind. The hard truth is not about the fight for democracy, but whether they are willing to recognize the central government's authority over Hong Kong. Bearing this in mind, it would be much easier to understand why there is always an undercurrent of opposition in Hong Kong politics. 
Therefore, it is time for the opposition to straightforwardly answer the blunt question of whether all they really want is to use Hong Kong as a base to subvert the central government under the disguise of the so-called "genuine universal suffrage." 




(HK Edition 04/27/2015 page8)

