
Xi calls for improved cooperation between China and Myanmar 
In a groundbreaking meeting, President Xi Jinping called on Myanmar opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi and her party to help foster a better understanding of China and view cooperation in a fair and reasonable manner. 
Xi made the comments on Thursday in Beijing when he met Myanmar's National League for Democracy chairwoman Suu Kyi, whose party is expected to perform strongly in elections later this year. 
"China and Myanmar are close, friendly neighbors," Xi said. 
Describing the relationship as a community of common interest and destiny, Xi said China has always adhered to pushing forward the traditional bonds and cooperation with Myanmar and looks forward to the reciprocation being continued. 
Xi also expressed hope that Suu Kyi's first visit to China, from Wednesday to Sunday, could help her to better understand China and the Communist Party of China, and would strengthen trust. 
Suu Kyi, wearing a white top and red skirt, said it is vital to be committed to developing the friendly relationship between the two neighbors. 
The party she leads admires the great achievements in China under the CPC and hopes to strengthen ties between the parties and peoples, she said. 
Fan Hongwei, an expert on Southeast Asian studies at Xiamen University, said Xi's remarks not only apply to Suu Kyi, but also to the Myanmar authorities and the people. 

Suu Kyi could help to ease the public's misunderstanding about Chinese investment and present suggestions to China for improvement, said Fan. 
Xi's remarks also sent a message that Myanmar could return to the global stage and rebuild ties with Western countries, but this should not be at the cost of hurting its ties with China, Fan said. 
Myanmar's government has sought to reduce its dependence on China, its largest investor, and reached out to Western countries since launching reforms in 2011. 
It has suspended some China-related projects, including a multibillion-dollar dam, even though economic ties warmed in November when both governments signed more than a dozen cooperation deals. 
Song Qingrun, a researcher on Southeast Asia studies at the China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations, said China's investment remains significant for the country, which faces a shortage of infrastructure and power. 
The first face-to-face meeting between Xi and Suu Kyi showed their pragmatic stances, said Song. It also will elevate the relationship to a new height and introduce more exchanges between various sectors. 
zhaoshengnan@chinadaily.com.cn 






 
President Xi Jinping meets Myanmar opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on Thursday. Wu Zhiyi / China Daily
(China Daily USA 06/12/2015 page1)
