Zhang Xiaoming, director of the Central People's Government's Liaison Office in the Hong Kong SAR, published a commentary last week entitled "Be confident in our political system when promoting universal suffrage with Hong Kong characteristics". As the SAR government's proposals for electoral reform will be submitted for the discussion and approval of the Legislative Council next month, his elaboration on "confidence in the system" is a timely guide. It allows people to understand why Hong Kong must conduct its constitutional reform in its own way to achieve the ultimate goal of universal suffrage.
What is the origin of "confidence in the system"? Zhang answers the question from four perspectives in his commentary and begins with a historical perspective. 
Democracy does not fall from the sky. It was developed on Earth. Democratic systems must each follow a specific historical logic, which must not be ignored or severed.
Hong Kong residents never had the right to select the governor by popular vote under colonial rule, which lasted over 150 years. All 28 governors were appointed by the British Crown, who held unparalleled powers. The governor was also president of LegCo; he was authorized to appoint lawmakers or strip them of their titles, decide when legislative sessions began and ended, and form and disband LegCo. No wonder one of them went so far as to admit "the governor's power is next only to God's".
Hong Kong's democratic development began in earnest in 1997 following the handover. In Appendix I the Basic Law stipulates that the Chief Executive may be returned by a broadly representative Election Committee (EC) through democratic consultation in Hong Kong. Or it can be nominated for selection by the committee through consultation and elected by members of the committee, which then seeks the central government's appointment of the elected person as CE of the SAR government. The first EC consisted of 400 members. It was later expanded to 800 and most recently 1,200 members. These increases have enhanced the degree to which the EC is representative. 
Meanwhile, LegCo has also gone through significant democratic change with the number of directly elected members growing from 20 in the first legislative election to 24 in the second and 35 in the third in 2012. 
The ongoing push to implement an electoral mechanism using universal suffrage for the CE election 2017 will allow more than 5 million eligible voters to elect the next CE by "one person, one vote" for the first time in Hong Kong. It will be a giant leap forward in the democratic development of the city.
Next is the realistic perspective. Hong Kong's constitutional development must proceed in full respect to its own real situation. In this regard the SAR government's constitutional reform package is currently the best for Hong Kong. What are the realities in Hong Kong today? As far as political reality is concerned its constitutional development must move forward instead of standing still; and the CE must be a patriot who loves Hong Kong as well as the nation. This means anyone who opposes the central government cannot be allowed to become the CE.
This reality requires the CE election to be as democratic as possible while ensuring all candidates are up to the patriotic standard. The method for selecting the CE by universal suffrage proposed by the SAR government meets this requirement through "nomination by a Nominating Committee (NC) and election by universal suffrage". 
From NC member recommendations to institutional nomination by anonymous ballot and CE election by "one person, one vote", the proposed method for selecting the CE by universal suffrage offers a greater level of democracy than any other format. It clearly reflects public opinion as expressed during two rounds of consultation. It is, therefore, the most suitable for Hong Kong today.
The third is a legal perspective. The proposed method of selecting the CE by universal suffrage fully complies with the principle of "One Country, Two Systems" and the Basic Law.
Its legal basis is solid. This is crucial to any electoral system. 
The opposition charges that the framework decision of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) on methods for selection the CE by universal suffrage fails to honor China's promise in the Sino-British Joint Declaration. Their assessment was typical misinformation stemming from political bias. The truth is Beijing took unilateral initiative on implementing universal suffrage in Hong Kong by setting it as the ultimate goal for the democratic development of the SAR in the Basic Law, whereas the Joint Declaration made no mention of the term "universal suffrage". The latter only says the CE "will be returned through election or consultation and appointed by the central government".
Last but not least is the lateral perspective. Hong Kong may be new to democratic elections but its electoral system is set to advance toward universal suffrage in respect to its actual conditions. The method proposed by the SAR government for selecting the CE by universal suffrage is certainly no less democratic than the British or US systems.
The author is the executive vice-president of the Hong Kong Chapter of the China Council for the Promotion of Peaceful National Reunification.
(HK Edition 05/14/2015 page11)

