


      The conclusion of National People's Congress (NPC) and Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) sessions marked the beginning of a critical year for China to pursue reforms, implement the rule of law and accomplish the 12th Five-Year Plan (2011-15).
      
        The "Four Comprehensives" strategy proposed by President Xi Jinping, as well as the "One Belt, One Road" initiatives, are important components of the two sessions and crucial to achieving the Chinese Dream. In regard to Hong Kong affairs, the central government has reiterated its support for the city and stressed the importance of "Hong Kong people governing Hong Kong" under the "One Country, Two Systems" policy. Beijing has also said that strict compliance with the Basic Law and Constitution is essential for Hong Kong to develop its economy and achieve democracy. Like most Hong Kong citizens, I am sure that under the leadership of Xi and the central government, the city and the nation can overcome tough challenges and achieve remarkable breakthroughs.
        
          China has enjoyed rapid development after 30 years of reform and liberalization. The mainland's economic development is entering into a period of broader reform. But it is also a time of new challenges and opportunities. As such, a central government leader with vision is required.
          
            Xi, since being elected at the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), has been encouraging his government to fight corruption and implement bolder reforms. His performance has been praised by the public and impressed people overseas. The "Four Comprehensives", include building a moderately prosperous society, deepening reform, advancing the rule of law and enforcing strict party discipline These were proposed by Xi at the end of last year and provide strong impetus for China's future development.
            
              But because of today's complex international situation and the challenges posed by domestic reforms, it is essential for China to apply the "One Belt, One Road" initiatives to promote cross-border cooperation and other mutual benefits. According to a government work report, projects under the "One Belt, One Road" initiatives will be combined with regional development and the construction of major projects like the new Eurasian Land Bridge. And 2015 will be a critical year for implementing "One Belt, One Road" initiatives. China has been cooperating closely with many countries along the economic belts. Therefore, a promising future for these initiatives is expected. China, together with neighboring countries participating in regional economic cooperation, will enjoy considerable benefits including increased prosperity.
              
                This is also crucial for the success of constitutional reform in Hong Kong. The attitude of the central government to Hong Kong's future has been clearly demonstrated during the two sessions. Premier Li Keqiang and CPPCC Chairman Yu Zhengsheng both stressed the fundamental principles regarding Hong Kong affairs: The "One Country, Two Systems" policy, "Hong Kong people ruling Hong Kong", "high degree of autonomy" and "to strictly comply with the Constitution and the Basic Law". When meeting NPC delegates from Hong Kong, Zhang Dejiang, chairman of the top legislature, advised Hong Kong people to seize a historic opportunity to achieve universal suffrage in 2017. He warned that they could not afford to miss this chance. Zhang also reaffirmed that universal suffrage should be in line with the Basic Law and the decision of NPC Standing Committee. Any advocacy of "Hong Kong Independence" or "self-determination" is intolerable.
                
                  Speeches from senior officials showed a consistent position regarding constitutional issues in Hong Kong. Everyone should discuss these issues in a rational manner and forge a consensus under the Basic Law and framework laid down by the NPCSC. Then, all citizens can achieve "one person, one vote" in 2017. This will help ensure the long-term prosperity of the city.
                  
                    Livelihood and economic issues in Hong Kong are never ignored by the central government. The recent protests against mainland travelers have alerted Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying. He raised the issue with officials during the two sessions. The central government is greatly concerned by this. It suggests appropriate adjustments be made to regulations covering individual visits and multiple-entry permits. Zhou Bo, deputy to the State Council Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, said these policies could be quickly updated.
                    
                      Leung Chun-ying deserves credit for the successful launch of the Shanghai-Hong Kong share-trading scheme last year. During the two sessions, Leung's attempts to promote a similar scheme linking Hong Kong and Shenzhen stock markets received a positive response from the central government. This shows Beijing is happy to offer financial support to boost the city's economy. Hong Kong people should seize this opportunity and contribute not only to the stability and prosperity of the city, but to that of the nation as well.
                      
                        The author is an ex-member of CPPCC and the Permanent Honorary President of CEA.
                        
(HK Edition 03/30/2015 page11)

