
Ho Lok-sang argues that while many in Hong Kong think Western-style voting is the way to good governance, there are far superior methods of selecting the best leaders 
Too many people in Hong Kong have their minds fixated on elections, as if free and "fair" elections are the golden way to democracy. I call this fixation of the mind "electionism". 
Actually there has never been such a thing as truly "fair" elections. Think about it. Politicians try to manipulate the psychology of the masses and win at the polls. The weaknesses of the human mind are well known. Can an election won by manipulating mass psychology be deemed "fair"? 
Jason Brennan has written a book about this, The Ethics of Voting. The website of the book describes Brennan's contribution as thus: "Nothing is more integral to democracy than voting. Most people believe that every citizen has the civic duty or moral obligation to vote, that any sincere vote is morally acceptable, and that buying, selling, or trading votes is inherently wrong. In this provocative book, Jason Brennan challenges our fundamental assumptions about voting, revealing why it is not a duty for most citizens - in fact, he argues, many people owe it to the rest of us not to vote." 



Why are elections considered so important? Just because they are a Western democratic tradition does not mean they deserve the importance they have earned. "Electionism" is based on a leap of faith: People have come to think that if the leader of a country is elected, they will be a great leader because they have "legitimacy". 
The vote does give us some sense of "empowerment". If a leader is not up to expectations, they may not win the election the next time. Elections do make leaders more accountable to the people. This is why I would have preferred that the electoral reform package, now vetoed by the Legislative Council, had been passed. 
But what is more important to the people of Hong Kong, and by the same token to the people of the nation, is that we successfully select capable leaders who can lead us to greater success. 
A book from ancient China, Zuo Zhuan, tells a story about Zi Chan, an official in the Kingdom of Zheng during the Spring and Autumn period (771-476 BC). Zi Chan gave many reasons why one needs to have the knowledge and expertise of a career in policymaking before one can serve as a mayor effectively to the benefit of the people. 
Today, we think each of us should have the right to stand for election, and to vote. We think of these as fundamental human rights. But why is it not more important that each of us just has the chance to compete for the power to govern based on one's merits? Where is the evidence that election is a more effective way of selecting leaders? Isn't it true that as long as the selection system is rigorous and fair, and is effective in generating a good leader, it really does not matter if the selection is through elections? 
On the mainland we now have a rigorous system of selecting leaders, but it is not through open elections. Those who subscribe to "electionism" call this system undemocratic. But why is this undemocratic? By most standards, our leaders have delivered good results. If anything, they have outperformed many leaders elsewhere who were elected. 
It is important to realize that even though there is just one dominant party on the mainland, none of the leaders is a dynastic one. No one can keep power within their family. There is rotation of power. Although historically there have been many incidents of abuse of power at the top, this is not unique to the Communist Party of China. I just cannot think of a system of government anywhere or at any time that has been clean of power abuses. Thus, the more important task for the nation, and for Hong Kong as well, is that we set up effective public governance mechanisms, so that anyone who abuses power can be made accountable. Thus no individual can be above the law. 
Many observers contend that this is not enough, because they say that in China the Party is above the law. They also criticize the National Security Law as ensuring the security of the Party rather than ensuring the security of the nation. But this is totally mistaken. Even though the National Security Law indeed protects the existing political system, the one-party regime really has no interest to protect. As long as no one is above the law, power abuses can be checked. The Party is merely a political infrastructure that belongs to the people. Because this political infrastructure can serve the people well, there is an imperative to protect it. The Communist Party of China is not a dynasty. People may not like the name of the Communist Party, but power rotation is alive and well in the country. Those who think of China as undemocratic without power rotation can look at China's history since its opening-up. But if we subscribed to "electionism" or "multipartyism", what is happening on the mainland would be beyond comprehension. 

(HK Edition 07/07/2015 page9)

