






Leaders from the Group of Seven (G7) industrial nations hold a working dinner in the Bavarian village of Kruen, Germany June 7, 2015. [Photo/Agencies]
At their recent summit, the G7 members issued a statement strongly opposing "any unilateral actions that seek to change the status quo, such as large-scale land reclamation" in the South China Sea and East China Sea. Comments:
China agrees with the G7 that freedom of navigation should be protected in the South China Sea. Besides, who is doing "large-scale land reclamation" there? It is Vietnam and the Philippines that have done and continue doing these things on islands they have stolen from China.
Shen Dingli, a professor on international studies at Fudan University, June 10



There is less understanding between Japan and the European members of the G7 than we might imagine. In terms of interests, the European countries might not share Japan's view; in terms of values, how could Japan that refuses to admit its own aggressive past be accepted by a community of democracies? After all, the G7 is an organization of all its members, not just Japan.
Shi Huaze, an associate professor in international relations at Beijing Foreign Studies University, June 9
The G7 summit has no right to discuss South China Sea issues. There are two main issues concerning the region: first, the territorial disputes between China and various claimants of the islands, reefs and asscociated waters in the region, which is solely the concern of China and the claimants; second, freedom of navigation, which is a matter of discussion between China and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Whatever statement the G7 makes, the South China Sea is none of its business.
Yang Xiyu, a researcher at the China Institute of International Studies, June 10
In 2014, the G7 expressed concern over the South China Sea and East China Sea issues. This year it has strengthened its wording to "strongly oppose". China has responded firmly by expressing its protest, but more actions are needed, such as expressing China's attitude via bilateral diplomatic means, and requiring it to offer an explanation for the statement. Sometimes strong measures are needed to prevent it from taking similar actions again.
haiwainet.com, June 10