


      Xiao Ping says the voting result shows the time is not yet right for universal suffrage, and it will not hurt to wait a few more years or, perhaps, more than 10 years
      
        Hong Kong people's dream of electing the Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017 was shattered on Thursday by 28 Legislative Council members who voted against the SAR government's electoral reform bill. It was no doubt a sad day for Hong Kong. That said, it was merely another stumble in Hong Kong's long road to achieving democracy. The SAR will still continue to go down this road. It is not the end of the world in our city of 7 million people.
        
          Let's go back to the 1980s. Hong Kong society was suffering from feelings of anxiety triggered by uncertainties over what lay ahead after the handover in 1997. The general mood of trepidation disappeared in 1990 when the Basic Law was promulgated. This not only gave Hong Kong much needed assurance about the status quo, but it also significantly boosted the city's confidence in the future. As a result, people across the social spectrum came up with a humorous way to express their sense of relief. To the simple question: "What follows 1997?" The answer was "1998."
          
            The Basic Law clearly stipulates that Hong Kong's democratic development should proceed in an orderly and gradual fashion. The central government was wholly sincere about implementing universal suffrage in the 2017 CE election. But achieving this in future will ultimately depend on society achieving consensus. The central government's hands are tied if Hong Kong fails to achieve such consensus. In other words, the demise of the electoral reform bill shows that Hong Kong is not 100 percent ready to have universal suffrage. Clearly, the time is not yet right for such a giant step forward. It will not hurt to wait a few more years or, perhaps, more than 10 years. Until then, the next CE will be selected by a 1,200-member Election Committee as in 2012. As Zhang Xiaoming, director of the Central People's Government's Liaison Office in the Hong Kong SAR, said: "The sun as usual rises".
            
              Many people are now worried the SAR government will find it even more difficult to do its job than before, as confrontations between the executive and legislative wings will be harder to settle. Such concerns are by no means unfounded, but they will not help the situation. As for the question of where Hong Kong's constitutional development is heading, CE Leung Chun-ying said recently the SAR government would now focus on economic development and livelihood issues.
              
                Hong Kong has been mired in political wrangling for far too long. But the experience just might offer people a fresh perspective on things - particularly if they stop thinking about constitutional reform for a while. Hong Kong people do need time to collect their thoughts.
                
                  The latest phase of constitutional development took two years to get to this point. Although the result was not what we were hoping for, at least more people have gained a better understanding of some important facts. These include relations between Hong Kong and the central government, the authority of the central government over matters concerning Hong Kong's constitutional affairs and the popular will of the people in the SAR. These are important gains from an otherwise disappointing experience. An ancient Chinese proverb sums up this situation well. Its English equivalent is: "What you lose on the swings, you get back on the roundabouts."
                  
                    If someone asks you "What follows 2017?" now, the answer has to be "2018". It is that simple.
                    
                      The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                      
(HK Edition 06/19/2015 page11)

