
Legislative Council President Jasper Tsang Yok-sing has every reason to deplore the poor relationship between the executive and legislative branches of the Hong Kong SAR. 
In summarizing the operation of the legislature over the past year, Tsang said on Thursday the failure to establish a constructive, cooperative relationship between the legislative and executive branches has resulted in some regrettable consequences. 
The diplomatic LegCo chief stopped short of elaborating on what those undesirable consequences are. But Hong Kong people know very well he was referring to the weakened governance of the SAR government. 
This has been reflected in endless delays in the introduction and implementation of vital public policies and initiatives. An example is the saga of the Innovation and Technology Bureau (ITB) initiative, which has been experiencing delays for three years. 
There is a growing consensus among members of the community that setting up a special agency to promote innovation and technology in the city is vital to diversifying the local economy and enhancing its competitiveness. But this has failed to convince radical lawmakers to stop blocking the initiative. They have been directing filibustering stunts against the ITB merely to vent their frustration over their failure to achieve some narrow personal or party interests. 
As a result of opposition legislators' "non-cooperation strategy" in the LegCo, social and economic development in the city has been frequently disrupted or hindered over the past decade, with government attempts to expand the narrow base of the local economy mostly failing to bear fruit. 
The narrow economic base has been largely blamed for some deep-seated social problems that have been plaguing Hong Kong, including a growing wealth gap, an increasing number of working poor, the lack of upward social mobility for young people and the economy's vulnerability to external shocks. 
Tsang also warned on Thursday that the quality of governance will only get worse in the year to come, with no signs that the executive-legislative relationship will improve. 
It is a pity that what is intended to serve as a democratic mechanism - a system of checks and balances - to protect the interests of the minority against the tyranny of the majority in the society has been hijacked by radical opposition lawmakers to advance their own agenda. There is surely a case for people to take a serious look at the flip side of democracy. 




(HK Edition 07/17/2015 page12)

