


      As soon as the government launched the second round of consultations on constitutional reform in the SAR, "pan-democrat" legislators said they would boycott consultations to further refine the nomination, election and appointment of the next Chief Executive (CE). Secondly, all 23 of them said they would vote against any such proposals when these are put to the Legislative Council (LegCo).
      
        Such behavior indicates that they do not act in the name of democracy and interests of Hong Kong citizens. As elected legislators and citizens, they have the privilege - not once, but four times, of contributing toward the implementation of universal suffrage for 5 million voters in Hong Kong.
        
          Who represents and cares about these voters?
          
            First, as elected representatives, I would have thought all legislators would realize they have to respect the views of Hong Kong citizens during this round of the consultation - these were the people who voted them into the LegCo in the first place.
            
              Second, they will vote in the LegCo to ensure more democratic changes go through with a two-thirds majority, thus improving the composition and representation of the Nominating Committee (NC).
              
                Third, in 2017, as members of the NC, they will have another opportunity, this time to vote to select their next CE.
                
                  Fourth, they, like all 5 million voters, will have the duty to cast their votes at the ballot box to elect a new CE in 2017.
                  
                    It seems that without showing the slightest consideration toward the electorate who put them in their well-paid positions, the "pan-democrat" legislators have decided to deny these citizens the possibility to participate in the first election by universal suffrage in a special administrative region of China.
                    
                      Are they genuinely concerned about the interests of their electors? I don't think so. For unknown reasons, or perhaps because of their political motives, they are treating citizen's rights to universal suffrage, in the 2017 CE election, with contempt.
                      
                        Alongside "pan-democrat" legislators, other organizations such as Scholarism, the Hong Kong Federation of Students and the "Occupy Central" movement will also boycott this round of consultations. Instead they say they will interrupt the process wherever possible.
                        
                          They recognize neither the decision of the National People's Congress Standing Committee, the importance of the rule of law in Hong Kong nor the legal framework established in the Basic Law. For months now they have only repeated vague and meaningless terms such as "I want genuine universal suffrage" and expressions like "international standards".
                          
                            They may represent the organizations behind whose names they hide, but they do not represent most Hong Kong people. They have hijacked the term "Hong Kong citizens" and fail to say anything substantial to support their arguments. Before long, they may be deluded into thinking they are behaving like Mahatma Gandhi or Nelson Mandela.
                            
                              Youth leaders may claim that they are taking action now to gain what is theirs in the future. But these are also unrealistic ideals. I would like to remind them that they have ignored the interests of those who worked hard to achieve Hong Kong's prosperity.
                              
                                This is selfish behavior.
                                
                                  The journey to democracy for Hong Kong can only be achieved gradually and according to local situation. This includes the political realities of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy. I would urge all those in positions of responsibility to contribute positively to the second round of consultations.
                                  
                                    There's nothing more democratic than giving 5 million people the right to vote. In Britain, central, local and regional governments have different selection, nomination and voting systems. There is no such thing as one system being more universal than the other. It is most important to give people the chance to vote rather political dogma and prejudice.
                                    
                                      For elected representatives, ask yourself the next time you use the term "Hong Kong citizens" when was the last time you consulted your constituents? Are you really representing them and their interests?
                                      
                                        The author is director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                                        
(HK Edition 01/13/2015 page1)

