
Kerry Brown says the reforms will offer 5 million voters the opportunity to choose between different candidates, and also help nurture a culture of political leadership 
Editor's note: This is the first of a two-part series. The first examines the election reform package and its proposals. The second will look at how Hong Kong people can engage with this process in the coming decade. 
Democracy is not an easy path to tread. And the idea that it can be handed around like a commodity from one party to another is flawed. An African academic some years ago commented on the colonial history of his continent, saying that while you could teach people many things, running their own political affairs was not one of them. 
Many have stated that the 1984 Joint Declaration between the United Kingdom and China, the basis for the final return of the city to Chinese sovereignty as a Special Administrative Region in 1997, "promised" universal suffrage for the selection of the Chief Executive by 2017. They say this is also enshrined in the Basic Law, the de facto constitution for Hong Kong by which the handover was managed. In fact, these various agreements make abstract commitments to constitutional reform. The detailed roadmap on how to achieve these was to be established over the years between 1997 and 2017. 
This was sensible enough. Who could really have known the circumstances in Hong Kong two decades hence, or those on the mainland, sufficiently to set down a specific arrangement back in the 1990s? 
In any case, governance is an organic thing, and its development involves a number of different elements, from the role of the legislature to the function of the executive and the place of civil society. No one knew how any of these would eventually turn out and interact when the handover was being finalized. 
Hong Kong was ambitious and expecting a lot of itself in believing that all these things would fall into place and it would have a well-oiled system to produce leaders as a result of universal franchise in 2017. It is flattering that people have such regard for democracy and how it creates the best leadership outcomes. But it is not surprising that the central government has proved more cautious. After all, if the system set up doesn't work after 2017, then Beijing will be one of the parties with the most to lose. Even critics have to at least understand why Beijing might be hesitant, even if they disagree with it. 
In this context, the announcement on April 22 of the Hong Kong government's proposals for how the 2017 elections for Chief Executive need to be conducted was predictable enough. They closely follow suggestions made by the government toward the end of 2014. A Nominating Committee of 1,200 will stand between aspiring candidates and the general electorate. 
Conceptually, the outcome is, and isn't, a democratic one. It isn't democratic in as much as the Nominating Committee will have enormous influence and power over who finally has a chance to campaign. This element in particular has sparked anger from "pro-democrat" groups in the city. It is, however, democratic in as much as once candidates have successfully navigated this pre-qualifying procedure, they will then be able to campaign before the public, and garner as many of the 5 million votes as they require to get into office. 
The Hong Kong government has made it clear that if this deal is not accepted, then the status quo presides. The CE will continue to be selected by the Election Committee alone with no "one person, one vote" election for general voters. If the Legislative Council does not give this proposal constitutional support with a two-thirds majority by the summer, then things will stay as they are. 
This is probably the time for everyone to take a deep breath. Politics is often about accepting compromise. The deal here is simple enough. Either have a change which promises, sometime in the future, the chance of further reforms. Or stick by principles, maintain what is believed to be the moral high ground, and hope that the situation after 2017 becomes ever more calamitous so that finally "true universal suffrage" is embraced as the only solution. This is a somewhat idealistic position to take, and an impossible one to predict with any certainty. 
What we can be certain about is that the current deal, with all its limitations, does offer the chance for 5 million voters in the city to choose from among numerous candidates of different persuasions. It also means a culture of political behavior and leadership can be nurtured, as long as people participate. 
Hong Kong deserves better quality governance. It needs to have a new generation of pragmatic political leaders who can rise through this system and robustly defend the city's interests. If opponents block the current deal, then even the opening to start creating this new leadership culture would be closed. All parties have a duty to work within the current parameters, and use their creativity to see how these can adapt and change in the future. They should support them, even if their ultimate ambitions might be different. 




(China Daily 05/22/2015 page9)

