
The focus of political interest in Hong Kong has shifted to the 2016 Legislative Council elections after the district council polls on Nov 22. The LegCo elections will be followed by campaigns for the Chief Executive Election Committee (CEEC) seats in preparation for the 2017 CE election. 
The opposition camp is expected to sabotage to the best of their abilities the lawful administration of the SAR government led by the current CE, in the belief that the greater the damage it causes to the operations of the SAR government the more LegCo seats it will win. Meanwhile, some hopefuls who are interested in becoming the next CE may also criticize the policies and administration of the current SAR government - albeit in an implicit and mild manner. The current CE and his governing team will be under more pressure next year than ever since taking office in 2012. 
In the upcoming LegCo election campaign season the opposition parties will not only go all out but also be much fiercer than they were in previous LegCo elections, because they have already killed the opportunity to elect the next CE by universal suffrage in 2017 and thus fully implement universal suffrage in the 2020 LegCo elections as a result. That leaves them no choice but to grab as many LegCo seats as they can in the 2016 polls. They believe more LegCo seats will give them more leverage in pressuring the central government to compromise. Besides, all of them are faced with increased challenges from leadership succession, which can be eased only by more LegCo seats. 
Opposition lawmakers used filibustering for the first time when the fourth LegCo term was about to expire. Their aim was to block the CE-elect's bid to reorganize the policy bureaus' structure before he took office in 2012. Although their attempt ultimately failed, the tactic proved quite handy and became the trick of choice for the opposition camp in the fifth and current LegCo term. 
Given the opposition camp's acknowledgement that it will play the filibuster card more than ever next year, some people have urged the pro-establishment LegCo members to push for the amendment of House Rules designed to limit lawmakers' ability to filibuster government bills. However, with the LegCo elections fast approaching and the campaign process for the 2017 CE election set for soon afterward, it is very hard for different pro-establishment political groups to remain united over amending legislative procedural rules. 
There is little doubt that the opposition camp will try even harder to disrupt the 2017 CE election than it did the last one in 2012. 
Given the existing CE election method and current political ecosystem, the opposition parties still have the opportunity to win enough seats on the CEEC to ensure at least one candidate from their camp in the 2017 CE election. They will undoubtedly do their utmost to win as many CEEC seats as they can as "bargaining chips" against other candidates. 
Compared with five years ago, not only is the number of people in the pro-establishment camp intending to vie for the CE post bigger this time, but their desire to do so is also stronger and more pronounced. Those parties will therefore do their best to win more CEEC seats. This will make it even harder than last time for the pro-establishment camp to agree on a candidate and back him or her to compete against the opposition candidate because there may be as many as three pro-establishment hopefuls competing against one another - in addition to the opposition candidate for the CE's office. 
In 2017, the current CE will very likely face fierce challenges from all the other candidates if he decides to seek reelection. In that case the battle for the CE post will be unprecedented in terms of scale and severity. The first CE of the Hong Kong SAR was reelected without competition and his successor won as expected, thanks to his popularity and generous support from the whole pro-establishment camp. But the same cannot be said of the current CE. If he chooses to run for a second term he will have to fight for reelection against not just the opposition candidate but possibly against two other pro-establishment candidates as well. 
The situation requires the current CE and his administrative team to do everything they can to strengthen governance in the coming year. And the key to success is to keep Hong Kong's development going in the right direction. 
The right direction has already been spelled out in the central authorities' suggestions published earlier this month for the 13th Five-Year Plan (2016-20). It can be summed up as "fully implementing the policy of 'One Country, Two Systems' and Hong Kong people governing Hong Kong as well as a high degree of autonomy". This will facilitate the SAR's efforts to develop its economy, improve people's livelihood, advance democracy and enhance social harmony by playing a bigger role in the nation's development. It should also form the heart of other candidates' campaign platforms. 




(HK Edition 11/30/2015 page8)

