


      Chan Tak-leung argues that a recent article by the former chief secretary has a threatening tone and displays a lack of respect for China's sovereignty over Hong Kong
      
        In Anson Chan's latest article in the local press, it appears to me that the former chief secretary is telling her financial supporters that she and "Hong Kong 2020" have contributed much to the recent debate on constitutional reform. However, her article also sounds like a ransom note making demands as she concludes by stating, and I quote:
        
          "The Hong Kong and central governments must listen to the voices of ordinary Hong Kong people and weigh very carefully the implications of such abject failure, both for Hong Kong's international standing and the good governance and stability of the city."
          
            The conclusions she draws in her article epitomize the hard-line ideology of "pan-democratic" legislators, the "Occupy Central" campaign and many student activists. My assessment is not made lightly but based on four things Chan said.
            
              Firstly, her use of the word "must" is a tough and demanding way to discuss these issues. When she was chief secretary during Hong Kong's final colonial days she was referred to as the "iron lady". For some years now, the press in Hong Kong has nicknamed her "the grandmother of democracy". Perhaps she still believes in the Chinese maxim that, "What your elders say must be obeyed". In Britain, two government chambers examine proposed legislation, but ultimately the government of the day makes the difficult decisions. China also has a consultative democracy when governing. Good governance is about consulting, listening and making tough decisions.
              
                Secondly, Chan continues saying the central and SAR governments "must" listen to the "voices of ordinary Hong Kong people". In her verbal evidence session to the Foreign Affairs Committee (FAC) last July, she referred to the poll with 800,000 people voting for "real universal suffrage". Did she refer to the other poll with nearly 2 million supporters of "universal suffrage in 2017"? No, she did not. I believe what she meant by "ordinary Hong Kong people" is privileged colonial mandarins like herself - senior legal representatives like Martin Lee, "pan-democratic" legislators, conveners of student bodies, academics and religious leaders who still refer to the central government in terms abandoned 70 years ago. I don't know if she includes the activists who wore masks, were equipped with weapons and who disrupted different parts of Hong Kong as "ordinary people" or not? If this is the case, their voices must not be heard as they definitely do not represent ordinary Hong Kong people.
                
                  Thirdly, she states that a failure to listen might have implications for Hong Kong's international standing. This is where her views on Hong Kong are contradictory. When she gave her verbal evidence to the FAC in July 2014, Chan was adamant that the domination of "pro-Beijing loyalists" in the previous Election Committee and current Nominating Committee (NC) was non-democratic and would not comply with the "international definition" of universal suffrage.
                  
                    Hold on a second! Isn't it true that Hong Kong's international standing as a global financial and commercial center is based on its entrepreneurship, openness and the innovative skills of its business sector? In any case, the current consultation process on constitutional change is aimed at refining representation of the NC not to mention the fact that its current 1,200 members represent 3 percent of the electorate. This compares favorably to the United Kingdom: The next prime minister of Britain will be elected by less than 300 members of parliament from one political party.
                    
                      What is more democratic? What is more consistent with the international definition of universal suffrage?
                      
                        Finally, Anson Chan's article employs a threatening tone. She ended by saying the implications will be detrimental to the "good governance and the stability of Hong Kong". Does she mean more filibustering by "pan-democratic" legislators - as this is certainly not good governance? More illegal occupations, more academic articles on independence or more appeals for help from outside Hong Kong?
                        
                          Through their verbal evidence to the FAC, I understand that both Chan and Martin Lee are strongly against Hong Kong being administered by "One System". China respects the "One Country, Two Systems" principle and the Basic Law that governs Hong Kong. It will not and should not allow the principle of "One Country" to be eroded - as China's sovereignty over Hong Kong is sacrosanct.
                          
                            Hong Kong will continue to enjoy a high degree of autonomy under the Basic Law and make strides in constitutional change so that its citizens can enjoy universal suffrage, good governance and stability in the future. As for Anson Chan, I am confident the proposals put forward by Hong Kong 2020 will be carefully examined - providing they conform to the Aug 31, 2014 decision of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC), the Basic Law and the "One Country, Two Systems" principle.
                            
                              The author is the director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                              
(HK Edition 03/26/2015 page10)

