
Ho Lok-sang writes that the 'Occupy Central' movement has caused slippage in the rule of law, contributing to the rise in violence committed by 'localists' 
Yet another clash between "localist" protesters and pro-establishment groups occurred last week in Mong Kok. It turned violent, people were hurt, and the police had to use pepper spray to stop the melee. 
Hong Kong is supposed to be an open society of law-abiding citizens who are well mannered and respect other people's rights. But, we have among ourselves groups calling themselves "localists" who demand that mainlanders go home. They say: "We use Cantonese. You do not belong to this place." And these are mainly young people who are supposed to be well-educated. 
People can and will have their likes or dislikes. Nothing can change that. But, in a civilized society, whether you like or dislike what's happening in Hong Kong, you need to respect each other's legal rights. The irony is that many of these youngsters are disgruntled about what they claim to be injustice, saying they want a fair society. They bemoan the mainland's inadequate rule of law. Yet they undermine the rule of law in the SAR by disrupting public order and causing chaos on the streets. 
All of this began with "Occupy Central". The leaders of the illegal protests say people can disobey the law without undermining the rule of law. Many of them are educators who have effectively converted their students with their civil disobedience theory. 
While Benny Tai Yiu-ting, Chan Kin-man and Reverend Chu Yiu-ming were preparing for the "Occupy" protests, I had occasions for an exchange of views with Tai and Chan. I tried to convince them that their theory is dangerous because it will cause "slippage" in the rule of law. I told them that while they themselves abide to their protocol of peace and order, their followers may not. As events unfolded, they had to admit I was right. Just two weeks ago, the police found a home-made bomb workshop and arrested a number of "localists". 
Even today, unfortunately, the theory that civil disobedience in Hong Kong is an act of justice and the depiction of today's Hong Kong as still in the "dark age" (luan shi) continue and remain popular among the younger generation. The "localists" wave the colonial Hong Kong flag, as if things were much better then than at present. The truth, however, is that we have now a much better social safety net, much better protection for labor, much better recreational facilities, much better healthcare, much better access to tertiary education. We even have a statutory minimum wage. An official poverty line has been drawn and various poverty alleviation measures have been introduced. 
Some people complain about press freedom and the rule of law. But any observer would have to agree that there is no official intervention in press freedom and the rule of law in the sense that a fully independent judiciary is intact, and indeed was reaffirmed in last year's white paper by the State Council. 
Are they blind to all this? Why is it that our younger generation has become a generation that knows only about their own rights, and not those of others or their obligations? 
Of course, there are many things we can complain about. In general, there is no problem in complaining because the authorities need to know what the problems are. But we also need to know there is no free lunch, and society ultimately must pay for everything. There is an "opportunity cost" for everything that we enjoy, and the authorities need to have a sense of proportion and the competing needs of society. Thus, there just may be a good reason why we may not get something that we think we deserve. In order to make intelligent collective decisions, we all need to contribute our ideas. A dialogue with an open heart that aims to build a better, fairer society is healthy. 
The "localists" really do not have any case. Their philosophy is that they need not worry about what happens on the mainland, and they part company with some "pro-democracy" people who want to build democracy in the way they envision on the mainland. Their focus, therefore, is just on improving Hong Kong. This philosophy is perfectly in tune with the "One Country, Two Systems" framework because the central government just wants Hong Kong people to manage their own affairs well. 
But, tourists from the mainland have a legal right to come to Hong Kong, and "localists" have no justification whatsoever to tell them to go home. They too have no case arguing against inward immigration for people who qualify to immigrate under the existing criteria. Indeed, their parents or grandparents most probably had come from the mainland. Hong Kong is largely a society of immigrants. The fact that they had come to Hong Kong earlier does not give them the right to deny others to come to Hong Kong to live. 
Our educators need to ask themselves why they have failed so badly in educating our younger generation. 




(HK Edition 06/30/2015 page11)

