


      Time is beginning to run out before the key Legislative Council vote on the immediate constitutional future of Hong Kong. Unless the opposition group in the legislature, which has certainly been ensuring a high level of suspense, has a last-minute surprise in store for us, the whole venture is in danger of running into a brick wall.
      
        It would appear that there has been no softening of the fronts in the debate, which is natural enough if this is a tactical approach aimed at securing a late agreement; but there are still no signs of what a compromise solution bringing the "pan-democrats" on board might look like. It would be desperately sad if no one is able to summon up the imagination to find one. The opposition camp are sticking firmly to the line that, if an imperfect proposal is once accepted and implemented, no further progress will be possible.
        
          This flies in the face of history. Britain, of course, was the pioneer of elected legislatures. The word "parliament" was first used almost 800 years ago, and originally meant a council of advisers all nominated by the King. Gradually the principle of allowing each region to be represented was adopted, but it was a long time before these representatives were chosen by anything we would recognize as a free election. And even when elections were free, for a long time the franchise was limited to property holders, and for an even longer time to men.
          
            In the United States, which as a newly formed country was able to set up her constitution from scratch, freedom of active and passive suffrage was built into the structure of the state; but it appeared obvious to the founding fathers that this was never meant to include people who were not white. The democracies we see today in advanced countries were forged through hundreds of years of debate, and of struggle too. They emerged and developed in the context of developments in society as a whole. If people had decided that they would not participate at all in an imperfect democracy, none of this would have happened.
            
              For those who believe that the acceptance of the current proposal is likely to block off all future progress, what do you suppose the consequences of rejection are likely to be? We have already been told that such an outcome will lead to the 2017 CE election reverting to the format of the 2012 poll, which all sides now regard as flawed and in need of reform. And, after that, what? Who will venture to design a new model for the introduction of universal suffrage in the aftermath of this stalemate? And, even allowing for a possible change in the composition of LegCo after the next election, who will have the capacity to come up with a new model which will have credibility both in Hong Kong and Beijing?
              
                Because, unless a new model emerges, there will be no plan left on the table, unless the National People's Congress Standing Committee maintains the existing proposal and advances it once more for the 2022 elections. And there is no particular reason why it should do so, once the proposal has been rejected by LegCo. Even if new LegCo elections change the picture of Hong Kong opinion, the central government may take the view that there is no pleasing the people of Hong Kong, and may present a more restrictive proposal on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. This might leave Hong Kong worse off, as regards the future development of democracy, even than it was in 2012, let alone compared with what could be if the present proposals go through. Above all, not only Beijing but the outside world will be left with the impression of a total impasse. This could do considerable damage not only to the image of the whole country, but also to the prospects for Hong Kong continuing to fulfill its well-established role as China's international gateway.
                
                  The author is a former UK diplomat specializing in China. He spent nine years as an analyst in Beijing. He now works as a freelance writer and commentator.
                  
(HK Edition 06/17/2015 page12)

