


      In the last couple of weeks, certain "pan-democrat" legislators have suggested a proposal to abolish functional constituencies in the 2020 Legislative Council (LegCo) election as a sweetener for them to consider participating in the vote on electoral reform. Of course, a two-thirds majority is needed in LegCo to enable Hong Kong's 5 million voters the opportunity to elect the next Chief Executive (CE) by universal suffrage in 2017.
      
        However, is this a price worth paying, or would it be a "bargaining chip" too far?
        
          I would suggest that Hong Kong's eligible voters should ask the question - "Could you entrust your future to the hands of 70 potential career politicians?"
          
            Hong Kong's LegCo was established under British rule in 1843. In the last century and a half, both official (ex-officio) and unofficial members were appointed by the governor. Unofficial members were usually the preserve of expatriates known as "Tai-pans" and their exclusive functional constituencies were banks, corporations, and international trade. It was not until Chris Patten's second year (1993) as governor when he handed over the presidency and ceased to be a member of LegCo.
            
              The last LegCo under British rule comprised 60 members. Seats were shared equally between functional constituencies and directly elected geographical constituencies. Functional constituencies are therefore not a new feature of the Basic Law, but a continuation of past experience on how best to deliver stability and prosperity to Hong Kong.
              
                So far so good, as representation in the legislature subsequent to 1997 has continued according to Article 68 of the Basic Law. This stated that the formation of the LegCo should, quote, "be specified in the light of the actual situation in the Hong Kong SAR and in accordance with the principle of gradual and orderly progress".
                
                  It is still more reassuring to see that Article 68 clearly states that "the ultimate aim is the election of all the members of the Legislative Council by universal suffrage".
                  
                    Progress has been made and in 2012 LegCo membership was expanded to 70 members, 35 returned through directly elected geographical constituencies and the remainder by functional constituencies. Within the realm of functional constituencies, elected members have come from a range of professions and industries - from finance to engineering, industry to social welfare, transport to tourism, IT to labour.
                    
                      I believe this is what is needed in a well-developed legislature, with legislators who live and work in the real world. Not a legislature populated by those who in Britain are referred to as living in the "Westminster bubble". In a healthy democracy, the last thing you want to see is a chamber full of lawyers or legislators removed from reality and disconnected from their constituents.
                      
                        Critics are unhappy with the election of legislators via functional constituencies in Hong Kong for a number of reasons. They believe electoral methods should be democratized. They also think the system helps to maintain the status quo for the benefit of the executive, hence it should be abolished.
                        
                          The functional constituencies, I believe, are crucial as they are a form of representation relevant to the unique constitutional status of Hong Kong.
                          
                            While the current round of consultations on constitutional change focuses on the election of the CE by universal suffrage, the Hong Kong electorate must also be aware that it would also mean that LegCo members may be returned by the same process in future elections. It is, therefore, important for the electorate to express their views now because it will affect how they elect the LegCo members to represent them in 2020.
                            
                              What better way for "pan-democrat" legislators to use this opportunity to put forward positive ideas to refine the different functional constituencies or even introduce new ones?
                              
                                Non-cooperative, non-negotiable positions are negative and do not allow for progress. Bearing in mind the expectation of the Basic Law is for gradual and orderly progress, and the anticipation that the electorate will enjoy universal suffrage when they elect the next CE in 2017, it is time to consider the long-term benefits to Hong Kong's democracy rather than stubbornly insisting on one position.
                                
                                  Democracy is about political participation. What else could be better than giving direct democracy to an electorate of 5 million as they exercise their right to vote for the next CE and a representative legislature? In Britain last week, we commemorated the 50th anniversary of Sir Winston Churchill's state funeral and I recall that the great man once said, "To improve is to change; to be perfect is to change often".
                                  
                                    A window of opportunity now exists in Hong Kong to examine how best to improve and update its electoral process. To stifle such improvements would be neither politically wise, nor democratic.
                                    
                                      The author is director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                                      
(HK Edition 02/05/2015 page1)

