


      As the Hong Kong legislature started its debate on the electoral reform package on Wednesday, mainland media outlets urged the SAR's lawmakers to consider the interests of their fellow citizens and support the historic proposal.
      
        A front-page commentary article in People's Daily said achieving universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive election went way beyond democratic development.
        
          It has become a vital issue concerning social stability, economic development and improving people's livelihoods in Hong Kong, the article stressed.
          
            Promoting Hong Kong's long-term prosperity and stability was essential for implementing universal suffrage in the city, it argued.
            
              The article noted that disputes over electoral reform have dragged on in Hong Kong for years. There have been lawmakers in the Legislative Council deliberately holding up important bills concerning people's livelihoods and the city's future development, it pointed out.
              
                The proposal, if passed, will see the city's 5 million eligible voters casting their votes to elect their leader for the first time in Hong Kong's history. Electoral reform will empower the city's leader with a greater mandate.
                
                  In addressing Hong Kong people's desire to improve governance, end political disputes and focus on developing economy, the central government developed a blueprint for universal suffrage for Hong Kong in 2017, the article emphasized.
                  
                    People's Daily said the central government's focus was not only on 5 million eligible voters' right to vote for a leader, it was also on the livelihoods of 7 million Hong Kong people.
                    
                      A commentary released by Xinhua News Agency described the LegCo's vote as the final push for achieving universal suffrage in the SAR.
                      
                        The article envisaged the future of Hong Kong if the proposal is vetoed. Failing to pass the reform would keep Hong Kong standing still in regard to constitutional development. And it would also aggravate social tensions, hurt the economy and the people's livelihood.
                        
                          Calling the opportunity a historic one, the article said Hong Kong's democracy had progressed steadily for the past 18 years since the handover. The country's resumption of exercising sovereignty in 1997 has given Hong Kong people the democratic right to participate politically. They had been denied the right to vote during the colonial era.
                          
                            It also warned lawmakers that if they were determined to vote against the public opinion and allow the political agenda of a small group of people to prevail, they would be remembered as people who had hindered Hong Kong's democratic development.
                            
                              The electoral reform proposal, presented by the government after two rounds of public consultations, is the most democratic proposal as well as the most appropriate one for Hong Kong, the article concluded.
                              
                                stushadow@chinadailyhk.com
                                (HK Edition 06/18/2015 page3)

