
Lau hopes to work with new faces 
Secretary for Home Affairs Lau Kong-wah expressed hopes of cooperating closely with newly elected councilors. He appealed to the city's people to express their opinions through district councils - the most important regional advisory body in Hong Kong. Lau was happy to see the highest ever turnout rate and a smooth election process on Sunday. He refused to analyze the overall result, but urged people to look forward to the future. 
FTU holds on to 29 seats 
President of the Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions (FTU) Lam Suk-yee said the union had managed to maintain its 29 seats after fielding 51 candidates in this year's election. The union's young rising star, the first-time candidate Chan Wing-yan, upset veteran politician Frederick Fung Kin-kee from the Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood, who has dominated Lai Kok district for eight years. Chan won by 99 votes. Lam said those who lost would continue to serve the community. 
James Tien calls party result 'so so' 
The Liberal Party Honorary Chair James Tien Pei-chun was not satisfied with the nine seats his party acquired in the election. He was also sad for some senior councilors who lost by a narrow margin. He felt the party's performance was "so so", but believed it would see a good result in next year's Legislative Council election. In term of both the ballot share and the total votes, the Liberal Party surpassed its performance in the last district election in 2011. 
NPP 'needs new approach' 
Deputy Chairman of the New People's Party Michael Tien Puk-sun admitted that the party should explore a new support base in the post-"Occupy" period. He stressed the election showed young people shared different values. The party would reflect on its current approach, he said. 
Civic Force routed in Sha Tin 
Civic Force announced it lost five seats in Sha Tin, which its members have occupied for more than 16 years. This is despite winning 26 seats after joining up with the New People's Party. The alliance was able to gain 75,793 votes, ranking as the third highest in the pro-establishment camp. Pun Kwok-shan, chairman of Civic Force, admitted the party was unable to address the needs of new voters. 
China Daily 

(HK Edition 11/24/2015 page3)

