
Chan Wing-kee, a Standing Committee member of Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference National Committee, holds the opposition camp responsible for bringing Hong Kong's democratic development to a standstill. 
Chan said he was very disappointed that the constitutional reform proposal, which could have given Hong Kong people the chance to choose the Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017, was blocked by the "pan-democrats". 
He said it was better if the government now focused on economic development and people's livelihoods. He also suggested Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying find more sites to cater to people's housing needs. 
"I feel very disappointed the reform was vetoed," Chan told China Daily in an exclusive interview. "If it was passed, the government would enjoy a more popular mandate. The democratic process could move forward in line with the Basic Law and most people's wishes." 
He blamed the opposition for this. "It was vetoed by the so-called democratic legislators who claim they support democracy. It is very simple truth that the reform was good for Hong Kong," Chan added. 
He wonders why more opposition legislators - including many lawyers and barristers - don't understand this. He believes they vetoed reform because of their own political agendas. 
Chan described the aborted reform as a "Greek tragedy". Before it happened, everybody knew the veto will lead to tragic outcomes, but they still proceeded with the veto. 
He is furious the opposition camp is now demanding the constitutional reform process be restarted. The government had made it very clear constitutional reform would not be re-launched during its remaining term if the reform package was vetoed. 
"Their demands are totally ridiculous - as it was them who voted down the reform," he said angrily. "People who said this are shameless. They know very well it will not be restarted in the near future but they use this as a pretext to make trouble," Chan said. 
"Even if it (constitutional reform) is reopened, it needs to conform to the National People's Congress Standing Committee's relevant decision delivered on Aug 31, 2014. The people who demanded these things talk a lot of nonsense and distort the truth," he observed. 
Chan also believes Hong Kong should refocus on livelihood issues. He stressed that housing was the most urgent matter to be addressed. He said Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying should try to find more sites for housing. 
"Owing to limited resources, it may be necessary to use (part of) the country parks or parks for housing purposes to address people's needs despite the objections of environmentalists. 
"The CE I know is person of high caliber. He is a decisive leader who is not afraid to tackle problems. It is high time he did more to improve people's livelihoods in the post-reform period," he added. 
joseph@chinadailyhk.com 







 
Chan Wing-kee, Standing Committee member of the National Committee of Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference. Parker Zheng / China Daily
(HK Edition 06/26/2015 page8)

