
It is heartening for everyone who loves Hong Kong and cares for its future to hear that nearly 55 percent of young people in the city support the electoral reform package tabled by the SAR government. 
Nothing could be more relevant and timely than this news. This is especially true at a time when the city is experiencing considerable pessimism: Universal suffrage for the election of the next Chief Executive in 2017 may fall through; the ensuing political wrangling could further divide the community; the city's rule of law may be compromised; and its social stability and economic prosperity undermined. 
That more than half of the young people polled recently by the Hong Kong United Youth Association have unmistakably voiced their support for the implementation of an electoral mechanism using a "one person, one vote" system within the legal framework laid out by the National People's Congress Standing Committee - will no doubt give a big boost to the dying "can do" spirit of Hong Kong. 
Of equal significance is that the latest poll results have set the record straight: For all their idealism and intrinsic impulsiveness, the majority of Hong Kong's youth are moderate and pragmatic in political discourse aimed at advancing democracy in the city. 
The message will help clear the reputation of Hong Kong's young people, which has been tainted by the illegal and violent behavior of some radical youths in the run-up to and during the illegal 79-day "Occupy Central" movement last fall. 
Of even greater importance, the results of the youth poll counter the myth created by radical youth groups that they represent all Hong Kong's young people. However hard the radicals have been trying to be vocal in the street as well as in the communities, they are a mere minority among Hong Kong youth, as indicated by the poll. 
As a key stakeholder of the future of the SAR, young people do have a say in the city's political and economic development. Nearly 80 percent of young people interviewed in the youth poll wanted lawmakers to respect the popular will. 
Now young people have made their common aspirations known for the SAR achieving universal suffrage in 2017, are the opposition lawmakers ready to listen to them? If idealistic young people can be rational and pragmatic, why can't the politicians? 




(HK Edition 05/15/2015 page11)

