
Hong Kong can still develop its own brand of democracy. There is no need to blindly copy Western parliamentary democracy or the American presidential system. Hong Kong is neither the United Kingdom nor the United States. What works well for them may not be suitable for this city with its unique character. Indeed, given current political realities, Hong Kong cannot and should not even attempt to become a carbon copy of the UK or the US. Hong Kong should strive to develop a democratic system best suited to its own circumstances. 
The government's public consultation on constitutional reform has ended. Here is what Hong Kong has achieved so far: 
The SAR has already achieved broad consensus on the principle that the Chief Executive (CE) should be elected by universal suffrage. Hong Kong has also accepted the principle that it should decide how to elect the CE. 
The SAR has not achieved consensus, however, on the mechanics of the election. The city is still debating the entry threshold for candidates and the role of the Nominating Committee. While Hong Kong accepts the idea of a Nominating Committee, it has not yet agreed on the precise role it should play. Some say the electoral mechanism should follow Western models. But by constantly looking overseas, the SAR is missing the opportunity to create its own indigenous model of democracy. What does "indigenous" mean? It should be a model that works in Hong Kong because of our unique history and culture. It should be one that develops out of our own convictions as a people - a Hong Kong brand - not a mirror image of a Western model. 
The decision made by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC) on Aug 31, 2014 already provides sufficient political space for us to develop a unique electoral model - different from the West. 
It is true that whatever Hong Kong proposes is unlikely to please everyone. It may have loopholes and institutional deficiencies. But it can be reformed further. Since it is uniquely ours, Hong Kong can keep improving it in the coming decades. An indigenous model of democracy will take a number of generations to grow and prosper. After all, democracy in the UK took 350 years to be introduced, modified and firmly established. Hong Kong people should be patient. The best things in political life come gradually, naturally, and evolve peacefully - not abruptly. 
The local model of electoral reform has been developing since the 1985 introduction of functional constituency elections to the Legislative Council and the elite election of the CE in 1996. Hong Kong has already taken the first steps in forming its own way of electing officials. The city can expect this model to evolve further after 2017. 
Hong Kong can start by allowing all candidates relatively easy entry into the selection within the Nominating Committee (NC), sticking to the NPCSC decision of selecting two to three final candidates with over 50 percent of the threshold, and then allowing eligible voters to vote for the CE. 
A candidate will be able to enter the first round of the election within the NC by being selected by one-eighth of the 1,200 members of the committee. If this is so, a maximum of eight candidates would then compete in the internal selection within the NC. 
During the first round, members would be able to vote for up to three preferences on a ballot listing all eight candidates. Candidates who failed to achieve 50 percent of the votes from NC members would then be automatically eliminated. 
During the second round, each NC member could vote for one to two candidates. The two or three top candidates having achieved 50 percent of the threshold would then go on to compete for the public vote in a direct election. 
In the third round of direct elections, a simple plurality would produce a CE - who would have to get more votes than the other two candidates. 
What the SAR has done is to work with what already exists, thus eliminating disruptions to the system, while working toward a new way of doing things. Hong Kong will get the best of both worlds. 
In short, the electoral method for the CE election provides an unprecedented opportunity for the people of Hong Kong to design, and build an indigenous model of democracy different from those in the West. The people will have democracy - but Hong Kong-style democracy. 
The author is professor and head of the Department of Social Sciences at the Hong Kong Institute of Education. 




(HK Edition 03/13/2015 page10)

