



Chief Executive (CE) Leung Chun-ying said in an RTHK radio program aired on Sunday that he found it "puzzling" the opposition had not come up with any alternative idea that complies with the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) on Hong Kong's electoral reform. 
Indeed, the "pan-democrats" have not presented any constructive counter-offer since they vowed, for the third time, to veto the SAR government's electoral reform proposal last month. They seem to have decided they cannot and will not accept the framework decision on the method of selecting the CE by universal suffrage in 2017 announced by the NPCSC on Aug 31 last year. 
Their main argument is that the CE election held according to the NPCSC decision would be a "fake universal suffrage". But they have failed to explain what exactly would make universal suffrage "real". The definition of universal suffrage is equal right to vote for all. The "pan-democrats" here in Hong Kong have painstakingly avoided acknowledging this simple fact. Although they have been quite consistent in fanning the notion of "fake" universal suffrage, they have failed to back their claim with facts. 
By now there is little doubt the opposition camp here is not fighting for "real universal suffrage", but rather the authority of the country's top legislature over fundamental matters such as Hong Kong's constitutional development. That is why the opposition has so doggedly refused to accept the reality we are in today. They try to justify their unconstitutional demands with non-existent "international standards". In doing so, they have only managed to highlight their lack of basic knowledge about democratic theories. 
Talking about "international standards", the opposition has yet to prove their demand for "public nomination" is supported by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights or any other international convention. Maybe they just assume most people in Hong Kong would believe whatever they say about democracy in general and universal suffrage in particular. That is a very risky thought for any political party or politician to have. True believers of democracy would never force others to accept their own ideas. 
It is simply wrong for any political party or politician to deny more than 5 million eligible voters in Hong Kong the right to select the CE by "one person, one vote" in 2017 according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC. Vetoing the SAR government's constitutional reform proposal would only prove the opposition lawmakers are conspiring to block Hong Kong's democratic progress toward universal suffrage. 

(HK Edition 05/04/2015 page1)

