


      Speaking at a seminar in Beijing on Sunday to mark the 25th anniversary of the promulgation of the Basic Law, Chen Zuoer, chairman of the Chinese Association of Hong Kong and Macau Studies, noted that the Basic Law has, over the past 18 years, played a vital role in the successful implementation of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle.
      
        Indeed, the Basic Law has accomplished enormous achievements since the handover by unfailingly safeguarding the county's sovereignty and overall interest, while maintaining the HKSAR's prosperity and stability.
        
          Hong Kong's history of development has shown that the city can thrive and prosper without democracy and universal suffrage, provided that it adheres unequivocally to the rule of law. But the city's hard-earned successes can vanish, and its economic and social systems can collapse, if the rule of law principle is compromised. In that regard, the Basic Law is of supreme importance to Hong Kong's stability and prosperity.
          
            Unfortunately, many people in Hong Kong, for their own political convenience, have deliberately misinterpreted and distorted the Basic Law. It is worth reminding that the Basic Law is a system for the central government to exercise its sovereignty, not a platform for some political groups to pursue an independent Hong Kong, or to serve their own insidious agendas.
            
              No matter how the opposition camp misrepresents and distorts the basic concept and provisions of the Basic Law, Hong Kong, as part of the country, must never stray beyond the jurisdiction of the central government. It must never show any disrespect to Beijing's authority, especially on sensitive and crucial political issues such as universal suffrage, which is certainly not an internal matter for Hong Kong to decide on its own.
              
                Under the principle of "One Country, Two Systems", Hong Kong is enjoying a high degree of autonomy with the privilege of "Hong Kong people administering Hong Kong" granted by the central authority. But Hong Kong people should try to cultivate a sense of national identity and enhance the feeling of national pride and allegiance.
                
                  Because constitutional development in the HKSAR is a matter of exercising sovereignty by the State over Hong Kong, it can never be taken lightly. Therefore, those proposals put forward in the past two rounds of public consultation that failed to comply with the framework outlined by the Basic Law and the NPCSC's relevant decisions were rightfully rejected.
                  
                    After years of bitter bickerings, the majority of Hong Kong people have remained optimistic that the political reform package, to be tabled next month by the SAR government, will pass in the Legislative Council. "Pan-democratic" lawmakers must realize that it is their obligations to respect public opinion and endorse the package, so that Hong Kong people can choose the Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017.
                    
(HK Edition 03/30/2015 page11)

