
Professor Albert Chen Hung-yee (Faculty of Law, University of Hong Kong), a member of the Hong Kong SAR Basic Law Committee, recently offered suggestions for the mechanism of the Chief Executive (CE) election by universal suffrage in 2017. 
Chen argues that if more than half of all votes were to be submitted blank - "junk" votes - the election should be declared null and void. This would mean the majority of voters were not satisfied with the any candidates chosen by the Nominating Committee (NC). But his proposal is flawed. 
Firstly, he did not specify whether blank votes should include invalid votes - also considered "junk" votes. "Junk" votes are inevitable in general elections and have been known to account for as much as 10 percent of all votes counted in some cases overseas. This is an excessively high rate for any election result to be truly representative, as statistically even a rate of 1 percent of junk votes can disrupt an election. There are many causes of invalid votes. Most are technical, such as failing to understand ballot paper instructions. 
Secondly, how should blank votes and "junk ballots" be differentiated? This difficult issue has proven controversial in the United States. The most famous example was during the 2000 presidential election between Republican candidate George W. Bush and Democratic candidate Al Gore. This election is infamous for its recounts and court battles. 
Thirdly, Chen's proposal is based on the assumption that all blank votes result from voter dissatisfaction with NC selected candidates. But this assumption is unfounded. What if a voter cannot choose a candidate and decides not to tick any of the boxes? Can anyone rule out this scenario or prove it has never happened anywhere before? I don't think so. It would be inaccurate to count all blank votes as signs of disapproval for the NC decision and therefore a reason to nullify an election result. 



That is why I find Chen's proposal unreasonable and unworkable. I have only analyzed the technical flaws in Chen's proposal. I'd like to stress its political shortcomings by asking: Does it comply with the Basic Law and relevant decisions by the country's top legislature? 
On the surface, the proposal does not seem to conflict with the Basic Law. But a closer look reveals that it allows invalid votes to challenge the NC decision - the authority for which is clearly established in the Basic Law. 
Another major problem is the suggestion that the NC may have to elect a "temporary CE" following the annulment of an election result because of too many "blank votes". But the term "temporary CE" is not in the Basic Law. Neither does it state that the NC may act as an Election Committee for choosing a CE. This means the nation's top legislature would have to amend the Basic Law in order for Chen's proposal to be adopted. Imagine what confusion this would cause in Hong Kong? 
Anyone familiar with the Basic Law and the electoral systems of Western democracies should realize the provisions of the Basic Law regarding the implementation of universal suffrage are far more democratic. 
This is why many American citizens agree that their two-party political system is no more than a choice for the lesser of two "evils". How about parliamentary democracy in Britain? British people only get to vote for the party of their choice, but the leader of the winning party becomes the prime minister with the Queen's approval. That means the British prime minister is not directly elected by universal suffrage. 
In Hong Kong we have the Basic Law, which stipulates that the CE will be selected directly by "one man, one vote" from 2017 onwards. This is as good a system as one can find. 
The author is a veteran journalist based in Hong Kong. 

(HK Edition 01/07/2015 page1)

