


      Chan Tak-leung says allowing 5 million voters to elect the next CE will be more democratic than accepting an unelected governor in HK's colonial era or continuing with the Election Committee
      
        When Hong Kong was a crown colony under British rule, governors with all encompassing executive powers were ceremoniously appointed by the Queen's letters patent on the advice of the prime minister. Most Hong Kong people would remember during the last five years before China resumed sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997, Chris Patten was given the governorship as a consolation prize by then prime minister John Major when Patten lost his seat as a member of parliament in the general election.
        
          As the only elected councilor of ethnic Chinese origin in Britain at the time, I remembered vividly I was invited by various Hong Kong media to comment on Patten's appointment since some Hong Kong legislators then (some of whom are still in office) complained about his lack of experience of Hong Kong affairs. I can also remember that these same legislators, most of whom are now leaders in the "pan-democratic" camp, welcomed Patten with open arms despite their initial protests.
          
            Why did these "pan-democrats" so willingly accept Patten then although he was appointed by royal decree? He was neither nominated nor elected by a committee made up of representatives from different sectors in Hong Kong. In other words, he was the opposite of democracy and a legacy of colonialism.
            
              Was democracy worthless to Hong Kong's elected legislators then as it is today?
              
                Why had they so willingly chosen to observe colonial rules and serve an unelected Patten then, rather than cooperating to administer Hong Kong in the best interest of its citizens at present?
                
                  Regardless of what the answers to these questions might be, history has told us that "pan-democrats" preferred an appointed Patten from London in 1992 to embracing electoral changes that will give Hong Kong's 5 million eligible voters universal suffrage to elect the next Chief Executive in 2017. They are happy to be labeled as "democrats" and are yet determined to short change Hong Kong citizens by forfeiting their promised rights to "one person, one vote" under the Basic Law.
                  
                    Do they know that their behavior amounts to regression rather than progression? Should they vote against the proposed electoral changes, they will literally throttle democracy in Hong Kong with their deliberate misrepresentations of "One Country, Two Systems", the Basic Law and the Aug 31 decision by the National People's Congress Standing Committee.
                    
                      Their betrayal of Hong Kong as a result of their misplaced ideologies, loyalties and political expedience for themselves will only please the SAR's competitors and invite further debates and disruptions that might deter investors and visitors alike.
                      
                        There was definitely no real universal suffrage in 1992, and what Patten introduced during his term in office were merely executive decisions rather than the more consultative approach that is being adopted by the SAR government today. As a matter of fact, I remember that very few citizens could vote for members of the then Urban Council and the Legislative Council. Most of the legislators were either ex-officio or appointed by their colonial masters.
                        
                          What has changed since then?
                          
                            The real answer to all these questions, I believe, lies in an old Chinese saying - "the moon aboard is especially round" or, perhaps, these "pan-democratic" legislators, academics and activists have forgotten there's another Chinese saying - "the moon at home is bright". They might think that Western democracy meets their so-called "international standards". Take a look at the next US presidential election campaign that is heating up, and you will see political dynasties like the Clintons and the Bushes hogging the headlines. Hardly any form of "public nomination" exists. I am sure our "pan-democratic" legislators are not so naive as not to recognize the fact that it is down to wealth and influence that rule the United States under the guise of democracy.
                            
                              Mind you, perhaps, they have all been so anglicized and brainwashed by past colonial masters that they not only reject the fact that Hong Kong is now a special administration region of China under "One Country, Two Systems", but are more than happy to deny their own heritage and any common sense to rationalize the current situation.
                              
                                Other than this, I cannot think of any other logical explanation for the "pan-democrats" to change their hearts and minds on democracy. The choice for Hong Kong citizens and its elected representatives at the moment is simple, yet a serious one. It is either going back to the status quo of electing the next CE by members of the Election Committee, or by universal suffrage.
                                
                                  I would like to appeal to "pan-democratic" legislators and request them to demonstrate their courage by embracing the proposed electoral changes. To allow 5 million eligible voters to cast their votes in electing the next CE will be, by any measure, more democratic than by accepting an unelected governor in Hong Kong's colonial era or by the Election Committee's 1,200 members.
                                  
                                    As a global city, Hong Kong needs a stable political environment, a skillful workforce, thriving economic and financial activities, a harmonious social order and well-developed infrastructure to sustain its status. Hong Kong has to learn from the past and adopt a better vision for the future. Only if the next CE and the LegCo are elected by universal suffrage can the city's growth proceed.
                                    
                                      Hong Kong deserves the best and I hope wisdom will prevail to see that democratic governance succeeds.
                                      
                                        The author is director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                                        
(HK Edition 06/18/2015 page9)

