It was no surprise when a small number of unruly protesters created an unpleasant scene on Wednesday night. They were expressing their contempt for the constitutional reform proposal presented by the SAR government that morning. These small, but noisy actions were different from what we saw during the "Occupy Central" movement except perhaps in the protesters' willingness engage in violence. They still believe they can do anything they want in the name of "true democracy" or "real universal suffrage". This includes illegal acts, even though such acts mock the true spirit of democracy.
The angry protest followed the walk-out by all but two opposition members of the Legislative Council (LegCo) on Wednesday morning. This was before Chief Secretary Carrie Lam presented the political reform proposal to LegCo. The opposition politicians were as loud as their supporters, but better behaved. Their demands, however, remain unconstitutional and unreasonable. Apart from the failure to provide a scientific definition of "fake universal suffrage" they left the impression that they were entitled to certain privileges during the Chief Executive (CE) election.
Some "pan-democrats" argue that all they want is equal political rights: In this case the right to stand in elections and the right to vote. What they have been doing by protesting, legally or otherwise, is opposing "screening". But universal suffrage primarily refers to the right to vote, while the right to stand in elections is subject to technical limitations the world over. That is an undeniable fact. By calling the decision by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) on Aug 31 2014 "fake universal suffrage", the "pan-democrats" are practically demanding they should be exempt from requirements for all intending to run for CE.
They remain adamant on their aversion to the idea of "love the nation as well as Hong Kong", which can be simplified as patriotism. Patriotism is one of the key criteria for CE election hopefuls at the nomination stage. Opposition parties refuse to accept it on the grounds that it technically "filters" them out. The rationale behind their rejection of this requirement is that they might never be able to garner over 50 percent of Nominating Committee (NC) votes to become legitimate candidates. This is presumably because most NC members would automatically consider them unpatriotic. They may not be far from the truth. But can they seriously blame NC members for viewing them in this way?
Patriotism is one of the basic requirements for candidates running for office in democratic societies. It is incomprehensible in any democracy that an unpatriotic person could run the government. Some "pan-democrat" politicians have argued that there is no standard definition of "patriotism". This may be true but it is also irrelevant. This is because NC members represent the views of their respective communities (sectors). Their decision must reflect the majority wishes of the communities they represent. If the "pan-democrats" cannot accept this kind of representative democracy they should consider giving up politics or becoming politicians in countries where patriotism does not matter.
Equality is the soul of democracy, at least in theory. The conduct of the "pan-democrats" indicates that they consider themselves to be above certain laws or established norms when these prevent them from achieving their goals. For example, in order to justify "Occupy" they conveniently "borrowed" the idea of "civil disobedience" without following the established principles of such movements. As a result "civil disobedience" became their excuse to infringe other people's basic rights. This was done in an attempt to blackmail the central government for political privilege.
The basis of their disrespect for the popular will is nothing more than a twisted interpretation of "universal values". They have not been able to show they respect to other people's freedoms and rights. The democratic principle of majority rule only matters when it serves their interests. That is why they refuse to respect the wishes of the majority and approve the SAR government's plan for electoral reform.
The "pan-democrat" politicians are determined to deny 5 million Hong Kong voters the opportunity to select the next CE by "one person, one vote" in 2017 because they believe they don't stand a chance of becoming legitimate candidates. They believe this because they cannot, or will not, pledge allegiance to the nation's Constitution, which is the basis of the Basic Law. They are not willing to commit to serving national interests as well as those of Hong Kong because this means "swearing loyalty to the Communist Party of China". For them, it is never about what the public wants but about pursuing their own agenda.
The author is a current affairs commentator.
(HK Edition 04/24/2015 page10)
