
Last Friday, just a day after opposition lawmakers threw out the SAR government's electoral reform package, Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying pledged to work with the Legislative Council in developing the economy and tackling livelihood issues. 
He gave top priority to placing the bills dealing with the people's livelihood over that for creating the Innovation and Technology Bureau before a meeting of the LegCo's Finance Committee on Friday. 
Those bills cover 11 initiatives that require total funding of HK$20 billion, including the relief measures announced in the Budget earlier this year. They include enhancing a remuneration package for District Council members, building rehab centers and a residential care home, approving pay rises for civil servants according to the 2013 pay trend survey and, for 2015-16, setting up a HK$1-billion recycling fund and a HK$1.5-billion increase in funds to aid small-and-medium-sized enterprises. 
Various political groups have welcomed the government's move. The string of initiatives is very likely to get the nod from lawmakers as they will benefit various sectors of society. 
In announcing that move, Leung said: "It's time for all of us to move on. We should try to reach a consensus on various economic and livelihood issues. The government attaches great importance to the relationship between the executive and legislature. Both should work together to serve the public of Hong Kong." 
There's no doubt the CE is sincere in his words and actions. But, there's a danger the opposition will not back the administration even if they endorse the initiatives. 
Immediately after vetoing the electoral reform proposals, the opposition camp demanded that the five-step procedure for constitutional reforms for universal suffrage be restarted. While the government has set political disputes aside, the opposition is still trying to use every opportunity to promote "genuine democracy". Polarization in this society has hardly receded. 
Why has Western democracy declined into "veto politics"? That's because contesting political parties are fiercely wrestling for governing power. Hong Kong has not escaped the contagion of "veto politics". In preparing for the upcoming district council and LegCo elections, the opposition will continue with their filibustering stunts. 
Nevertheless, Hong Kong needs reconciliation. Despite the difficulties and obstacles along the way, the SAR government should resolutely move ahead to work for the well-being of Hong Kong people. 
The CE and his colleagues must have the full support of the people in tackling various issues. The government should not only spend more money on uplifting the people's livelihood, it must resolve the city's deep-rooted problems. 
The city's elderly need more care. A recent public outcry over the maltreatment of the elderly at the Cambridge Nursing Home suggests that their living conditions have become a very serious issue as the population ages. Poverty among the elderly is a shame for Hong Kong, where the average per capita GDP is more than $38,000. Taking care of the elderly's needs is an apolitical initiative that can help reduce conflicts between the two political camps, and possibly help lessen filibustering in the LegCo. 
Housing, needless to say, remains a top priority for Hong Kong people. Property prices have continued to set new highs. More than 260,000 families are on the waiting list for public housing, while 85,000 families are living in mostly illegal subdivided flats. Many young people, in particular, can't afford a home. The government has to help those most in need the sooner the better. The housing issue will be test of the opposition's sincerity in helping to improve the people's livelihood. It's irrational for them to impede relevant government bills in LegCo. 
The government should facilitate integration between Hong Kong and the mainland. An article entitled "A Motherland's Embrace", published in The Economist on June 13, said "more than at any point since the end of British rule in 1997, Hong Kong's economic fate depends on mainland China". 
Hong Kong's future hinges on development in the Pearl River Delta. In this regard, the SAR government should improve on policies affecting mainlanders. 
The anti-separatism and anti-independence battle should continue although this is a highly political issue. Unless this battle is won, all efforts to promote economic development and improve the people's livelihood would be foiled as society would be further torn apart. 
To achieve reconciliation in the community, it's necessary for the government to adopt less-politicized policies, but brushing aside serious political issues won't help reconciliation. The CE and his colleagues are facing unprecedented challenges. 
Members of the pro-establishment camp should throw their full support behind the government to help it cope with the challenges. As an ally consisting of different political and interest groups, the patriotic camp might have differences over certain public issues, in particular, those relevant to relations between employers and employees. Thus, coordination among the camp should be strengthened, and the government should pay more attention to their views. 




(HK Edition 06/24/2015 page8)

