


      Zhang Xiaoming, director of the Central People's Government's Liaison Office in the HKSAR, offered an explanation of the Basic Law regarding the structure and workings of the SAR government as well as its relationship with the central government in his speech at a symposium marking the 25th anniversary of the promulgation of the Basic Law. Obviously, Zhang did not add a "new idea" to the constitutional code of the HKSAR but merely explained it in a clear and easy-to-understand way.
      
        As expected, some key opposition figures reacted furiously to Zhang's speech - particularly the part about the separation of executive, legislative and judicial powers. Zhang basically said the principle of government in Western democracies cannot be applied "as is" in Hong Kong. His words are based on historical facts as well as reality, whereas his detractors cannot back up their accusations with any facts - only claims.
        
          This is not the first time some opposition figures have resorted to groundless claims and half-truths to advance their agenda. There is no reason for people to believe they will not do it again in future. That said, the public must keep in mind that not everybody is well aware of the truth they are trying to hide.
          
            For example, former chairman of the Democratic Party Martin Lee Chu-ming claimed that the separation of powers is enshrined in the common law and that Hong Kong's government must follow this principle for the sake of the common law system it has adopted. But this is not true. Britain is the birthplace of the common law system but its political structure has never been known as an example of the separation of powers. It has been judiciary-led since the nation became a constitutional monarchy.
            
              Lee also said Hong Kong had separation of powers as a British colony and therefore should have it now. Again, this is a lie. Hong Kong never had a legislature with enough power to provide "checks and balances" to the governor. The governor was picked by the British government and sent to Hong Kong with unmatched authority to run the colony through its entire government - including the legislative branch. It was a logical policy on London's part in tandem with the absence of democracy until the last days of colonial rule. But this is definitely not an argument Lee needs to make today.
              
                Even if Lee believed the great majority of Hong Kong residents would not bother verifying the validity of his claims, he should have done so himself. This is for the simple reason that a lie can never become a truth no matter how many times one repeats it.
                
(HK Edition 09/15/2015 page9)

