
Hong Kong's past success as an international financial center and regional hub for services was nurtured in a relatively stable political and social environment. In this environment conflicts were resolved between the government and stakeholders away from the public glare. 
This has not been the case in recent years when opposition politicians and their supporters have grown accustomed to challenging the authorities, mostly over trivial matters. Without the publicity such antics bring, fanned by pro-opposition media outlets, the "pan-democrats" would have withered and faded from the public view. 
The biggest publicity stunt this group of political opportunists has mounted is its insistence on blocking the passing of the constitutional reform bill which promises universal suffrage in the 2017 election to choose the Chief Executive. 
The majority of Hong Kong people are undoubtedly mature and strong enough to withstand such setbacks in the progress of democracy. Any impact it may have on the Hong Kong economy is expected to be minimal. 
But business leaders interviewed by China Daily on Wednesday agreed that constitutional reform which could foster a much less contentious political and social environment would benefit Hong Kong in the long-term. The powerful Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce issued a statement which says that electoral reforms are "important to the preservation of Hong Kong's ongoing prosperity" because "political stability represents a crucial factor to investors" in making a choice between Hong Kong and other competing cities. 
Indeed, Hong Kong is facing mounting competition from several neighboring cities, notably Shanghai and Shenzhen, which are developing their own free trade zones to better serve their respective hinterlands. These aspiring financial and business centers are snapping at the heels of Hong Kong. 
To maintain the SAR's lead, the government, as a facilitator, has to make difficult choices in investing in the city's infrastructure facilities. But frequent political bickering, initiated mostly by opposition lawmakers, has caused costly delays to projects widely deemed to be crucial to future economic development. 
Some business leaders and political analysts have argued that Hong Kong needs a strong leader to push through long-term policies. The benefits of these may not be immediately felt by the public. What they mean is that Hong Kong needs a leader who can rally public support in making long-term plans to enhance the city's competitiveness. The government's proposed electoral reforms are designed to produce such a leader. 




(HK Edition 04/23/2015 page9)

