


      Wang Guangya, director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the State Council, said in an interview with two Hong Kong-based newspapers that the central government has always supported the Hong Kong SAR achieving universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive election. But Wang stressed that this can only be achieved in accordance with the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC). He also noted that the assertion that "to pocket it first" would be "to pocket it forever" is misleading the public and a misinterpretation of NPCSC decisions.
      
        It should be noted that the central government has never used the term "pocket it first" in the context of Hong Kong's constitutional reform. The opposition parties thought they found the perfect excuse for blocking the implementation of universal suffrage in 2017 by claiming that "to pocket it first" will become "to pocket it forever". But they failed to present any evidence to back up this claim.
        
          It came as no surprise when some opposition politicians responded to Wang's comments on Tuesday by accusing him of exceeding his authority in stating that CE election arrangements may change in future. These kind of accusations are another example of misleading the public by misrepresenting or omitting the facts. What Wang said is that the arrangements of CE elections by universal suffrage might be changed, but only after the 2017 CE election by universal suffrage is held according to the Basic Law and relevant NPCSC decisions. And it must follow a proper procedure if the SAR government finds it necessary to ask the NPCSC for a change in the constitutional arrangements of democratic elections in Hong Kong. Such a decision must be based on public consensus. This cannot be formed without local voters first casting their ballots in a CE election by universal suffrage.
          
            It is common knowledge that representative democracy by nature cannot be perfect. This means there will always be things that need to be improved in all democratic electoral systems. In Hong Kong's case constitutional development must proceed according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC. Any change of the electoral system can only be proposed after universal suffrage is implemented. This is a matter of constitutionality and procedural justice.
            
              Throughout the process of working toward implementing universal suffrage in 2017 the opposition parties have shown no faith in procedural justice or democratic principles. From "international standards", "civil disobedience" to "real universal suffrage" and "to pocket it first means to pocket it forever", they have provided no solid proof they deserve the public's trust. It is high time they stopped trying to confuse people and began convincing 5 million eligible voters they are true democrats dedicated to serving the overall interests of Hong Kong.
              
(HK Edition 06/17/2015 page12)

