
Tim Collard writes the government's constitutional reform package is a great opportunity which should be seized in the best interests of Hong Kong 
On the subject of Hong Kong's electoral system for 2017 and beyond, the fronts are hardening and the government is desperately trying to reverse this process. 
For this reason the big guns are now being wheeled out: Chief Secretary Carrie Lam has made a speech appealing to the opposition within the Legislative Council not to bring about an irreconcilable confrontation. What is needed, Lam indicated, is a period of calm, realistic reflection; sadly, these qualities have not been much in evidence recently. The intransigence which was on show toward the end of last year, at the time of the 'Occupy' street protests, has not dissipated, even though the streets are now calm. If the government has shown steadfastness in not backing down from its constitutional principles, the radical opposition has equally refused to recede from its more extreme positions. 
It is an important principle in politics, as in life, never to let the best be the enemy of the good. A more homely way of expressing this is with the proverb "half a loaf is better than no bread". I am not myself implying that the current proposals for the 2017 election are inadequate; I am aware that there are numerous people in Hong Kong who do think so, and hoping that they will not allow themselves to block a settlement which they feel to be imperfect. Most political settlements are imperfect; most political achievements fall short of an ideal, but that does not mean they are not achievements, or can simply be dismissed and disregarded. 
Lam pointed out, quite correctly, that the choice of a political leader by a free vote of Hong Kong citizens is a change of huge magnitude - something that has never happened before. It will take Hong Kong into new territory - uncharted waters. Even if the proposals are unlikely to conjure an immediate earthly paradise in the HKSAR, it is surely impossible to see them as anything but a step forward. One of Lam's predecessors as chief secretary, Anson Chan, has said that if Hong Kong agrees with the current proposals there will be no further progress. I cannot see any compelling reason for such a pessimistic assessment. 



And what possible progress will be achieved by a complete rejection of the proposals? First of all, of course, the likelihood is that the procedure for the election of the next Chief Executive will represent no advance on the last election, which means that progress toward democracy in the territory will have stalled. Furthermore, it is likely to remain stalled, as the rejectionist attitude will signal a refusal by Hong Kong to work together with the central government on constitutional development at all. As there is no conceivable basis for Hong Kong to work actively against the central government, the result will be a sullen stand-off, with Hong Kong institutions working alongside central government officials while refusing to communicate constructively with them. And what conclusion is Beijing likely to draw from that? Only that Hong Kong has nothing sensible to say, and so they will stop listening. How advanced democratic reform is supposed to emerge from such a dialogue of the deaf is beyond my understanding. The only result will be that Hong Kong will be deprived of influence over its future, let alone over that of China as a whole. 
The "pan-democrats" have shown great passion and energy, and they are motivated by patriotism and concern for the future of Hong Kong. It is to be sincerely hoped this passion and energy can be directed into constructive work within the existing framework, and to inspiring a similar passion for constructive and innovative contribution to the HKSAR. It has been made clear that the proposed arrangements for 2017 are part of an ongoing process whereby democracy can be gradually rolled out to Hong Kong, but this will inevitably depend on how comfortable the central government feels with the territory's use of its freedoms. There is surely further scope for democratic development in the HKSAR, but the possibility of a populist anti-government candidate is clearly not something which can be contemplated, either now or for some way into the future. 
Even if the passive franchise is still restricted, the prospect of a full active franchise is a step forward which progressive elements in Hong Kong should not miss out on. They should seize the opportunity of electing a Chief Executive who is clearly accountable to the Hong Kong electorate as well as to the central government, and should work within the context of the next administration to ensure the maximum political and economic benefits for the Hong Kong people, and bring about the best possible configuration of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle. 
The author is a former UK diplomat specializing in China. He spent nine years as an analyst in Beijing. He now works as a freelance writer and commentator. 

(HK Edition 05/04/2015 page1)

