
China's Ambassador to Britain Liu Xiaoming published a signed article in the Daily Telegraph on Monday on constitutional reform in Hong Kong. In his commentary, Liu explained the confusion created by the opposition camp in Hong Kong and its foreign supporters, particularly "international standards" in democratic elections and "real, or fake, universal suffrage". It is yet another lesson for those who attempt to justify their unconstitutional, impractical and undemocratic demands with half truths. 
"International standards" in democratic elections is the first and most intimidating idea the opposition camp brought up in their attempts to render the Basic Law and decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) irrelevant in the ongoing debate over the method for selecting the Chief Executive by universal suffrage. They managed to fool some people who apparently did not know a lot about the issue. After a while it became obvious that such "international standards" never really existed. As a result of this revelation, the expression has all but disappeared from the opposition camp's list of phrases. It seems they finally realized they cannot fool all the people all the time. 
Now, the term most frequently used by the "pan-democrats" to justify their refusal to respect public wishes is "fake universal suffrage". This is used in reference to the SAR government's electoral reform package based on the Basic Law and relevant NPCSC decisions. They have yet to define exactly what "real universal suffrage" is. Their accusations are merely based on the belief they will be at a disadvantage if the government proposals become law. 
This may be true, but the problem is they cannot convince the public they deserve preferential treatment when it comes to the nomination stage of the CE election by universal suffrage. Clearly, they believe the right to stand for election means they can run for the CE's office without meeting the same requirements prescribed in the Basic Law and NPCSC decisions. In other words, an election by universal suffrage is "real" only when the "pan-democrats" are guaranteed a candidacy. How can any unbiased person accept this as fair? 
As Liu and many other commentators overseas as well as in Hong Kong have shown, the "pan-democrats" have done a poor job stating their case. They have made many serious mistakes. They have also totally failed to provide any solid theoretical arguments to back up their agenda. The worst mistake of all is their dogged pursuit of personal benefits by all means necessary at the expense of the public. Their no-holds-barred approach toward achieving their goals is way beyond what is acceptable as far as democratic principles are concerned - especially in regard to majority rule. 
By ignoring the majority wishes of Hong Kong society, the opposition is not just mocking democracy, but insulting people's intelligence. This is why they will never get real majority support, unless they completely change their thinking and start all over again. 




(HK Edition 05/20/2015 page12)

