
The prospect that thousands of supporters and opponents of the SAR government's proposed electoral reform package will simultaneously rally outside the Legislative Council building next week to promote their cause has worried many people who care for the well-being of Hong Kong. Events during the 79-day "Occupy Central" campaign last fall shows that any encounter between supporters of the two opposing camps is highly likely to result in violence. 
Hong Kong police have been rightly preparing for potentially violent acts by radical demonstrators. Over the past few weeks, officers have been performing various exercises with the aim of maintaining law and order around the LegCo building, particularly on July 17 when lawmakers vote on the reform proposals. 
It was comforting to hear Secretary for Security Lai Tung-kwok reassuring lawmakers on Wednesday that police were prepared for any outbreaks of violence. But no plan is free of flaws. However hard the police have been preparing themselves, there is no guarantee it will be an event free from violence. 
Every citizen has the right to express views and advocate them in public places. Indeed, the fact that demonstrators will be able to rally outside the LegCo building is compelling evidence of the freedoms enjoyed by Hong Kong people. But an assembly of thousands of rival demonstrators in a small area is a recipe for violence, unless self-restraint is sufficiently exercised by each participant. But this will only be possible when reason prevails. And any further violence will only spread hatred and further divide society. This is the least desirable scenario for Hong Kong - a city already plagued by political wrangling over universal suffrage. 
Although differing on how a "one person, one vote" election should be implemented in Hong Kong, supporters and opponents of the electoral reform package have claimed they are championing democracy and working for the well-being of society. If they are sincere in their words, they must to respect the law and renounce violence. After all, democracy has nothing to do with violence. Nor can it be achieved through violent acts, as demonstrated by history. Violence is always the partner of political chaos, which is hardly an option for any sane person. 




(HK Edition 06/11/2015 page10)

