


      The decision by the Civic Party's Ronny Tong Ka-wah to quit the party he co-founded nine years ago will be a watershed in Hong Kong's future political landscape, heralding an inevitable split within the opposition ranks into two camps - one comprising moderate, pragmatic members, and the other hardliners.
      
        While the speed with which Tong left the party - coming days after the opposition's veto of the SAR government's electoral reform plans - might have surprised some people, the opposition's split has been widely expected.
        
          Moderate and pragmatic opposition members, including Tong, have long realized that their party has been hijacked by radical members who continue to work outside the "One Country, Two Systems" framework. They are also aware that the organization they cherish is no longer a suitable platform for them to carry on with their political mission. The radicals' recent maneuvers, including threats of violence and vote-buying rumors that helped to coerce all opposition members into vetoing the electoral blueprint, can only leave them further disillusioned.
          
            Tong and others in the opposition camp, particularly the Democratic Party, have to break ranks with the radicals and go on their own if they are to advance democracy or pursue any other political objectives in the SAR. They know very well that "dialogue with the central government is the only way to achieve universal suffrage", as Tong said at the Monday press conference. They are also fully aware that without "One Country, Two Systems", Hong Kong would be nothing more than an ordinary Chinese city. But, most important of all, they know that only by being a loyal opposition can they be a constructive force, which can make positive contributions to Hong Kong society.
            
              A tearful Tong apologized to his supporters at Monday's press conference, saying his decision to leave the party has been a "very painful" one. However, he should have no regrets because, by splitting with the radicals and going his own way to pursue a "middle-of-the-road" path in political discussion, he has done the people of Hong Kong a great favor. This is the right path for Hong Kong to advance toward democracy, and to conduct any political discourse that's constructive for Hong Kong society.
              
(HK Edition 06/23/2015 page9)

