Hong Kong is looking forward to refocusing on economic development and improving people's livelihoods after constitutional reform was derailed by the opposition camp. Hong Kong's greatest advantage as a free economy is its "One Country, Two Systems" policy. Its biggest opportunity lies in the opportunities coming from the mainland's robust development. Hong Kong should seize precious opportunities created by the "One Belt, One Road" strategic initiatives. It should make full use of its own strengths and elevate its competitiveness by playing a constructive role in the nation's economic development. That will allow the SAR to develop new growth engines linked to the national economy.
Zhang Dejiang, chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, said at a recent meeting with visiting Hong Kong entrepreneurs in Beijing that the SAR's place in the world economy would be determined by its own economic position and strengths. It would not be shown by disputes over so-called real democracy or street politics. It must focus on addressing livelihood issues such as housing and employment as well as boosting economic development.
Hong Kong has been a victim of ill-motivated politics in recent years. The "pan-democrat" camp has triggered one political dispute after another. It has disrupted the SAR government with "filibusters" and "non-cooperation". It has done this with total disregard to the damage its actions have inflicted upon the city's economic development and people's livelihoods. In the past few years almost all fiscal funding bills tabled by the SAR government were delayed until the last minute. This repeatedly resulted in fiscal "cliffhangers". In the 2013-14 fiscal year, 27 municipal projects were obstructed by "filibusters". These were initiated by opposition lawmakers with an average delay of six months due to a lack of funding. Combined budget overruns reached HK$2.5 billion as a result.
Today, Hong Kong's biggest challenge is providing people with affordable housing. The government is doing its best to build more homes for the public. But the largest of these projects in recent years - the Northeast New Territories Development Plan - has run into endless obstacles. The establishment of the Innovation and Technology Bureau has been debated for three years. But it is still unable to obtain the necessary funding to begin operating. This again is due to repeated blocking by opposition lawmakers via "filibusters". Now Hong Kong has fallen behind Singapore and Shenzhen in terms of innovation and developing new technology.
It has been 18 years since the handover and the bond between Hong Kong and the mainland has grown beyond most people's expectations. Blessed by the "One Country, Two Systems" policy, Hong Kong is in a unique position to overtake its main competitors in regard to economic development. Currently, the country is promoting cross-national economic initiatives known as the "One Belt, One Road" strategy and other international economic projects. The strategy aims to foster closer links in regard to policies, infrastructure, trade, capital and understanding among countries along the ancient Silk Road and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road. It is no longer just an idea; it will lead to real achievements in coming years.
Hong Kong is the third-largest financial center in the world. It has been closely linked to the global economy for decades and enjoys the advantage of a common law legal system similar to those of many Western economies. It also has world-standard accounting practices, international banking know-how, a freely traded currency and a talent pool recognized by many countries and regions around the world. Most of these qualities are missing or in short supply on the mainland at this moment. That is why Hong Kong is tipped to play a prominent role in developing the "One Belt, One Road" strategy. The city has no reason not to become involved in these great opportunities.
Hong Kong has a vital role to play in the Maritime Silk Road vision because of its strategic location and trade links with the countries and regions involved. Hong Kong can offer them great expertise and experience. The SAR will no doubt be a great asset to these strategic initiatives. This is because of particular experience and ability in business management, investment and financing, project management, accounting and telecommunications. Hong Kong's role as the largest offshore renminbi hub will also help it maintain its important place in the regional and global economy. This is, of course, because it is a crucial link between the mainland and the rest of the world.
Hong Kong is uniquely positioned to benefit from the "One Belt, One Road" strategy if it is committed to playing an active role in these initiatives. To do so it must abandon pointless political wrangling. The city needs to focus its efforts fully on economic development and addressing key livelihood issues.
The author is president of the Kowloon Federation of Associations.
(HK Edition 08/06/2015 page9)

