


      Chan Tak-leung examines some of the world's most famous democracies and discovers they do not meet the unrealistic standards demanded by HK's 'pan-democrat' camp
      
        From the very beginning of the current consultation on constitutional development, "pan-democrat" legislators vowed to veto any government proposals which fell short of "genuine universal suffrage". They, together with activists from "Occupy Central", Scholarism and Hong Kong Federation of Students, are calling for "civic nomination" as part of their demands for "genuine" democracy. They claim these will meet "international standards".
        
          As a result of their veto, 5 million voters in Hong Kong will lose the chance to vote in the "one person, one vote" election for the next Chief Executive in 2017. The time is drawing near for the government to review comments and suggestions in the second round of the consultation and then to propose a reform package to the Legislative Council (LegCo).
          
            In face of opposition to the decision made by the National People's Congress Standing Committee, the composition of the Nominating Committee (NC) and considerable ignorance about the "One Country, Two Systems" policy and the legal framework set out in the Basic Law on elections, legislators will have to face two serious consequences of their veto. One, not only will 5 million eligible voters be disappointed in 2017, they will be upset again during the next LegCo election in 2020. Two, their demands for so-called "genuine" universal suffrage and "civic nomination" are mere slogans. They bear no resemblance to any international standards adopted by democratic countries around the world.
            
              Let's examine five nations with advanced democracies to see if "civic nomination" exists in their "one person, one vote" electoral systems.
              
                I will begin with the "Mother of Democracy" - Greece. Its most recent election was held only on Jan 25. With seven political parties and 300 seats in its parliament, the new prime minister (with 149 seats) was sworn in after reaching a coalition agreement with the sixth-largest party (with 13 seats). This is how the election concluded - but what about the position of the president? Hong Kong "pan-democratic" legislators will be disappointed, for there was neither "civic nomination" nor "universal suffrage" in the election of the president. The current president of Greece was nominated by the prime minister and elected by parliament.
                
                  What about the United States - a global power that preaches democracy around the world. It has a "one person, one vote" system but the president is elected by "indirect electors" - with citizens voting for members of its Electoral College.
                  
                    What about "civic nomination"? There were attempts by individuals and groups to stand either for Congress or the presidency, but the dominance of the Republican and Democratic parties means the two-party system remain the status quo today.
                    
                      Let's look at India. With 813 million eligible voters, India is the largest democracy on earth. Narendra Modi, its current prime minister, was swept into office when his BJP party won 282 out of the 543 seats in parliament during the last general election. India's head of state, the president, was elected by members of parliament and its legislative assemblies by indirect vote. Again, there was no civic nomination and no universal suffrage.
                      
                        As for France, the election of its president had to go through two rounds of voting. A candidate had to collect the signatures of at least 500 elected representatives out of a total of more than 47,000. After the first round of voting, the two candidates who received the highest number of votes went into the second round. Its president, as a result, was elected under the "one person, one vote" system but nonetheless, all candidates were associated with political parties and in this case, President Francois Hollande, the winner, is a candidate from the Socialist Party. There was no sign of "civic nomination" in this election.
                        
                          Finally, let's move to Britain where in exactly four weeks, its 46 million registered voters will go to the polls - not to elect the next prime minister, but the 650 MPs who will represent them in the House of Commons for the next 5 years. It is a "one person, one vote" election but the outcome of who will run the country depends very much on whether a single political party can go through the threshold with a majority win. If not, history will repeat itself again as in 2010 it took the Conservative and the Liberal Democratic (Lib Dem) parties five painstaking days to come to an agreement and form a coalition government. Nick Clegg, leader of the Lib Dem, was made deputy prime minister, despite the fact that his party has won only 57 seats. This time round, both leaders of the Conservative and Labour parties were elected by their respective party supporters representing 0.43 percent and 0.27 percent of the total electorate. Even Hong Kong's Nominating Committee has more legitimacy as its constituents are more representative and democratic.
                          
                            Constitutional developments in Hong Kong will continue to make advances despite current debates. The Basic Law, under Article 45, made it very clear that developments must take into consideration the SAR's actual situation and in accordance with the principle of gradual and orderly progress. It is imperative to consult, develop and agree on democratic procedures for the Nominating Committee as stipulated in the Basic Law. Elected legislators should listen to their constituents and not veto any advances in democracy with their dogmatic political agenda.
                            
                              The author is the director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                              
(HK Edition 04/16/2015 page10)

