The University of Hong Kong (HKU), for the very first time in its history, finds its University Council without a chairperson this academic year. The power vacuum is the result of political wrangles over the rejection of a law professor as the sole candidate for the position of pro-vice-chancellor (teaching and learning). That professor did not get the appointment partly because of what he, as dean of the law school, did during the illegal "Occupy Central" movement last year. The issue is, of course, political through and through. This is why his supporters are trying to paralyze the council in retaliation against its decision to reject their favorite candidate.
The HKU Council will get its new chairperson somehow, but he or she must have the ability to deal with the fundamental political conflicts in Hong Kong regardless of their own political inclinations.
The current focus on political wrangling in Hong Kong is the opposition's attempt to seize the governing power of the SAR from the central government in the name of "true democracy". If the HKU Council chairperson openly opposes the opposition camp, given the HKU's political traditions, he or she will no doubt find it extremely difficult, if not impossible, to do the job. If the position is occupied by someone not particularly interested in politics, he or she will still have to work under the "One Country, Two Systems" principle. A lack of political prowess could render them unable to perform; it could also force them to reveal their true political colors.
Some people believe anyone who works in the best interests of HKU deserves consideration for the HKU Council chair regardless of his or her political views. Frankly, I find this view too academic. HKU - and every other university in Hong Kong - faces two major challenges: One is to handle the university's relations with its mainland counterparts appropriately; the other is to deal with the worsening political situation in Hong Kong. I do not see how a politically inept person can handle either issue.
A mainland leader paid a visit to HKU a few years back and announced a plan to increase cooperation between mainland universities and HKU. But this plan has met many obstacles because of the political stance of certain individuals in Hong Kong.
The political inclination of a professor or of the university management may not affect research and teaching of the natural sciences. But it will definitely affect research and teaching of social sciences and humanities. Faced with the growing divide between students and faculties over important political issues, no university management can afford not to take sides. In Hong Kong, the reality is that no one can do a good job managing university affairs without taking political sides.
HKU is a stronghold for "traditionalist" forces in Hong Kong. It, therefore, tends to react negatively toward efforts to advance university affairs under the "One Country, Two Systems" principle unless these efforts serve their own agenda. Similar conflicts of interest can be seen in other institutions in Hong Kong. Indeed, all management personnel are faced with the same political challenge. They must have the ability to deal with the fallout of political wrangling.
Some people may argue that political capabilities were not required by management personnel in the past. This is true because under colonial rule people only had to do their jobs. They could ignore politics. Indeed, most local residents had few opportunities to get involved in politics in those times. It was not until 1984 that the colonial administration began introducing representative democracy. This was to maintain Britain's influence in Hong Kong in the post-handover era.
After the establishment of the Hong Kong SAR in 1997 the political divide began to widen. Local affairs quickly became politicized. The "pan-democrats" became increasingly assertive. Now, management personnel everywhere are under growing pressure to deal with political issues on top of professional concerns. This is the simple reality and no one can deny it.
As such, management personnel in Hong Kong must deal with mounting political pressure no matter which "side" they are on. For those who side with the pro-establishment camp, it is particularly vital to understand that there is no hiding from key political issues.
According to existing rules, the Chief Executive of the HKSAR, who is chancellor of the HKU by default, is responsible for appointing the council chairperson. Who he picks as the next HKU Council chairperson will definitely send a clear political signal.



(HK Edition 11/18/2015 page10)
