At the time of writing, the debate in the Legislative Council on the electoral reform package is still going on at least until the next day when it is expected to be vetoed by the 27 "pan-democrats". Because this result was known days ago, the debate is really just a "show" on the part of opposition camp. They are just trying to impress their followers. They want them to know they have put up a good fight to block reform and have now finally succeeded. They want us to see their folly: They have rejected a wonderful political offer to Hong Kong citizens. They regard this as a victory. But why did their supporters gather outside the LegCo building all day and night? Unlike the pro-reform supporters, who were there to make a last effort to push the package through, these people did not appear to be there to celebrate a victory.
If you talk to young people there they tell you it was to ensure there are no last-minute defections by opposition lawmakers. Their mutual distrust is so high it takes rumors of HK$100 million bribe to hold their shaky alliance together! It later turned out that this is only a lie made up by lawmaker Leung Kwok-hung, also known as "Long Hair", to impress the media. This has now landed him in an ICAC interviewing room. This shows us how far some people are prepared to go to sabotage the introduction of universal suffrage in Hong Kong. It now looks like these extremists are going to get their way.
For the record I have been campaigning (with my Meeting Point friends) for the right to vote for the leader Hong Kong since 1981. It now seems that I can only exercise this right in another lifetime. But I have no regrets. I am a much wiser person now. I realize democracy is often just a shallow term. It has to be accompanied by the right ideals in order to work effectively. I only want a good type of democracy - not the phony kind that offers me the chance to vote every four or five years under the illusion that I can change the world.
The proposed constitutional reform package is possibly the best design for universal suffrage in Hong Kong under the current political and social conditions. All sectors of society can send their representatives to the Nominating Committee (NC) to nominate the Chief Executive candidates who will then be returned by "one person, one vote". This will ensure that only a candidate acceptable to all sides can become Hong Kong's leader. At the same time, anyone who does not love the country and love Hong Kong will be rejected by the NC. This is the real reason the dissidents don't like the NC and desperately want to get rid of it. They have hijacked our collective desire for universal suffrage in a futile attempt to blackmail the central and SAR governments into accepting their unreasonable demands. A deadlock developed when Beijing refused to give into them.
Now that a veto appears inevitable, it is reassuring to recall repeated statements by central government officials that no matter what the outcome of electoral reform in Hong Kong, the "One Country, Two Systems" policy will not change. The central government will continue to support the long-term stability and prosperity of the SAR. Hong Kong may not yet enjoy universal suffrage elections, but the city will remain as vibrant as ever. After the veto, the sun will still rise tomorrow and on subsequent days. It really is no big deal.



(HK Edition 06/18/2015 page9)
