


      In what is seen as an attempt to prevent moderate opposition lawmakers from voting for the government's electoral reform proposals, League of Social Democrats lawmaker Leung Kwok-hung played dirty tricks over the weekend.
      
        To the dismay of his comrades in the opposition camp, he inadvertently exposed his own scandal, which has shed new light on the true colors of some of the most vocal "opposition camp member" in the city.
        
          Leung told the media early on Saturday that "a mysterious person", whom he did not know, offered him in February HK$100 million for him to vote "yes" for the government's electoral reform plan. But later on that same day he admitted - when grilled by the media - that he had made up the figure just to "attract media attention".
          
            Before Leung admitted to playing dirty tricks, there had been rumors circulating in the city just a few days ago that Beijing would induce opposition lawmakers with HK$300 million each to support the reform package. Leung's scandal has added credibility to the notion held by many people in the community that those rumors are part of the maneuvers orchestrated by radical members of the opposition camp to foil the SAR government's electoral reform plan for the election of the next Chief Executive in 2017 via "one person, one vote".
            
              Such desperate attempts could only suggest that what the radical lawmakers are pursuing is not democratic advancement for Hong Kong and the overall benefits of the society, but narrow personal and party interests. This gives moderate opposition lawmakers a strong enough reason to break ranks with their radical peers, and heed the popular will. After all, dirty tricks won't help promote democratic advancement in the city. They would only undermine democracy.
              
                A roster of recent opinion polls have shown the majority of Hong Kong citizens support a reform package based on the legal framework laid down by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress based on the Basic Law. In the latest poll conducted by Hong Kong Research Association last week, 64 percent of the respondents said lawmakers should heed the public will and pass the SAR government's reform plan.
                
                  Majority rule is the binding principle used most often in the decision-making process of democratic entities. If the moderate opposition lawmakers are sincere in promoting democracy in the city, as they have claimed, they should prove it when the Legislative Council votes on the reform proposals.
                  
                    Dirty tricks won't help promoting democratic advancement in the city. They would only undermine democracy. Only by respecting the will of the majority of citizens, can the opposition lawmakers contribute to the democratic advancement of Hong Kong. Repentance is salvation. If they continue to ignore the public will, and pursue narrow personal and party interests at the expense of overall interests of Hong Kong society, they are on track to face political backlash.
                    
(HK Edition 06/15/2015 page12)

