



The prospect that Hong Kong will eventually push through anti-subversion legislation under Article 23 of the Basic Law should not worry anyone. 
But the mere suggestion of Hong Kong introducing the mainland's State Security Law before it enacts its own version of anti-subversion laws has drawn howls of protest from some sectors of society - particularly members of the "pan-democrat" camp. This fact alone strengthens the argument that the HKSAR Government should legislate under Article 23 sooner rather than later. 
These protests have added credibility to the suggestion that some members of the Hong Kong society have treacherous intentions against their own country. After all, why should any single law-abiding citizen worry about anti-subversion legislation? 
Members of the opposition camp have been pursuing their political aspirations in the name of democracy. They are supposed to know that loyalty to one's own country is a virtue greatly valued in all democratic countries. Many Western countries and Asian democracies have legislated against acts of treason for the sake of national security. So there is nothing wrong with Hong Kong introducing anti-subversion legislation in the same context. 
Concerns about any harm to the city's existing freedoms are totally unwarranted. It has been made very clear that the intention of the Article 23 legislation is to deal with subversive behavior. There hasn't been any suggestion of any intention by anyone involved to reduce the freedoms Hong Kong people enjoy. 
Rather, it will help safeguard the overall well-being of Hong Kong society. The city has built its economic success by playing a unique role - serving as a bridge between the nation and foreign countries. This wouldn't have been possible without a stable investment environment. An anti-subversion legislation will help ensure the much valued social stability by preventing political extremists using the city as a bridgehead to subvert the State. 
It has never been more urgent than now for the SAR government to introduce Article 23 legislation. This comes after certain elements in society have openly advocated ideas of "self-determination" and even "Hong Kong independence". After all, it is Hong Kong's inescapable constitutional duty to introduce an anti-subversion legislation. The SAR government is required to pass laws prohibiting acts of "treason, secession, sedition, or subversion", under Article 23 of the Basic Law, the constitutional foundation of the "One Country, Two System" principle. 

(HK Edition 01/22/2015 page1)

