
HK lawyers acquiring a qualification to practice on the mainland find it's a degree worth the hard work it takes to achieve. Fan Feifei reports.
Still in his 30s, lawyer Albert Tsui, sitting in his office in Beijing, epitomizes what many Hong Kong legal eagles dream of achieving. Tsui now serves as legal director for a Global 500, fully certified to practice law on the mainland. Trained in the UK in common law, Tsui began his career in Hong Kong. Like many Hong Kong lawyers, however, Tsui worried about the potentially limiting future of lawyers caught in the common law system in Hong Kong, while untold opportunities appeared to beckon from across the border.
"Although being a lawyer in Hong Kong is a decent and respectable job, with a high salary, I was curious about the mainland. It developed so fast. I wanted to go for the adventure and challenge myself."
Tsui moved to Beijing in 2006, working in the office of a law firm whose headquarter was in Hong Kong. Hong Kong's legal system is founded in common law, while the mainland is under the civil law system. Hong Kong lawyers who increasingly see the future in cross-border legal affairs need to pass the national judicial exam.
A tough hurdle
The national judicial exam is considered an extremely tough one for Hong Kong lawyers. Unlike judicial examinations in most other countries, candidates sit the mainland's examinations on 17 subjects all at the same time: civil procedure law, criminal procedure law and administrative law, even the law regarding outer space.
Tsui had to go back to a school offering specialized courses to help Hongkongers prepare for the examinations.
"I spent three months preparing for the exam. I quit my job and attended classes every day, never taking a break during that time. The mainland exam puts heavy emphasis on rote learning. There are many points of fact you must recite."
"Moreover, I needed to practice Mandarin. Mine was very poor when I first came here. Sometimes I couldn't understand specialized legal words heard in class, so I recorded them and listened again after class. I also had to learn how to write simplified Chinese for the exam since we always use traditional Chinese in Hong Kong." He summed up the whole experience as "unforgettable". Tsui passed the exam and got his qualification in law after what felt like a hard struggle.
Tsui believes Hong Kong lawyers who upgrade their credentials have certain important advantages over their mainland counterparts. "They are more international and know how to tell foreigners the situation on the mainland by using the legal language that their European and American customers understand."
"The role of Hong Kong lawyers has also been changing. In the past Hong Kong lawyers helped foreigners learn how to invest on the mainland. Now, with the development of the mainland economy, more mainland enterprises are going overseas for investment. So our work is to help mainland companies learn about the world," said Tsui.
He agreed that Hong Kong lawyers wanting to make their mark on both sides of the border are on the right track. Since the mainland market is so big, there are endless opportunities for well-qualified legal counsel.
The number of Hong Kong lawyers actually passing the mainland's national judicial exam is still pretty small. "There are only a few dozen Hong Kong lawyers with mainland qualification," said Eric Fung, president of the Hong Kong Professionals' (Beijing) Association.
Cross-border services
Passing the mainland examination is not the only path for Hong Kong lawyers to acquire a legal standing on the mainland.
Many more Hong Kong lawyers think they've made a better choice by staking their futures in cross-border legal services, at "joint law firms" in the country's free trade zones (FTZ).
Adam To, a Hong Kong lawyer, opened a law partnership last year with a mainland counterpart from Hunan province. Their company operates in the Hengqin Free Trade Zone in Zhuhai, Guangdong province
Regulations issued by the Department of Justice of Guangdong province last August specify that Hong Kong and Macao law firms may establish joint practice partnerships in cooperation with mainland law firms, in the Guangdong Pilot Free Trade Zone. The regulations apply in Shenzhen's Qianhai, Zhuhai's Hengqin and Guangzhou's Nansha. Renhe Qibang (Hengqin), the joint law firm where To is the deputy director, is among the first groups operating under the new regulations.
To's legal practice now has 35 lawyers from the mainland, Hong Kong, Macao, the US, the UK and Australia. Most are graduates of top universities in China and abroad. In the past, companies were required to comprise a mainland law firm in partnership with a Hong Kong, Macao or foreign law firm to carry on business in a FTZ, although the foreign partners are barred from direct participation in mainland legal affairs. Legal services had to be split and handled by different partner law firms.
Now joint law firms can offer services at one stop for legal affairs related to Hong Kong, Macao and foreign countries. Hong Kong lawyers may collaborate with mainland colleagues and jointly offer comprehensive legal services, To said.
"It is also a good opportunity for mainland law firms to strengthen cooperation with Hong Kong and Macao law firms to provide high-quality cross-border legal service to promote closer economic and trade cooperation among the mainland, Hong Kong and Macao," he added.
Joint law firms are proving major assets to mainland corporations wanting to develop branches in Hong Kong, make investments, register companies in the city, buy securities, exchange real estate or establish a global investment platform.
"We serve as the legal consultant for individuals and enterprises, provide consultation of immigration and notary service and offer suggestions for mainland companies planning to acquire Hong Kong, Macao and other overseas companies," To explains.
Li Bingyong, director of Zhuhai Justice Bureau, said joint law firms break down barriers among mainland, Hong Kong, Macao and foreign countries' law services. This marks a breakthrough in the legal community and a creative exploration for the cooperation of lawyers from different jurisdictions.
More tie-ups encouraged
More and more mainland enterprises are developing connections with overseas multinational companies, bringing corresponding increase in communication with Hong Kong, Macao and overseas centers. Adam To encourages other Hong Kong law firms to get on board and take advantage of the new regulations.
Daniel Lau, 36, has worked at an international law firm in Beijing for two years, but still isn't qualified to practice mainland law. His job with the firm is restricted to dealing with legal matters involving Hong Kong and foreign countries. That includes helping Chinese mainland enterprises with initial public offerings on overseas markets.
Lau said the Shanghai Free Trade Zone presents opportunities for Hong Kong lawyers, even without going through the process of acquiring mainland certification while still making important contributions to the mainland's economic development.
Like the Guangdong Free Trade Zone, foreign and domestic companies are permitted to establish formal joint ventures providing cross-border legal service in the Shanghai FTZ. Baker & McKenzie became the first foreign law firm to acquire a license to operate there in cooperation with a Chinese partner in April 2015. The joint partnership offers both international and domestic legal advice. Both foreign and domestic lawyers will be employed.
To recommends that Hong Kong lawyers who plan to acquire legal standing to work on the mainland develop a comprehensive, systematic understanding about the mainland's legal system, legal environment and the development of China's democracy and rule of law.
"Hong Kong lawyers are accustomed to dealing with cases using English, however, mainland lawyers use Mandarin to communicate with their customers. Hong Kong lawyers need to adapt to this."
Contact the writer at fanfeifei@chinadaily.com.cn







Renhe Qibang, a tie-up between law firms in Hong Kong and the mainland, received a license to operate in Hengqin area of Zhuhai under the Guangdong Pilot Free Trade Zone in April. Provided to China Daily












Former Macao chief executive Edmund Ho Hau-wah (center), Yao Jian (left), deputy director of the central government's liaison office in Macao, and Li Jia, Zhuhai Municipal Party secretary, attended the inaguration of the Hengqin FTZ.





(China Daily 05/13/2015 page9)

