
Chan Tak-leung analyzes the vital role of district councilors in Hong Kong and offers some sensible ways to improve their performance and also their relevance 
In about two weeks, Hong Kong's 3.9 million registered electors will be going to the polls to elect 431 district councilors (DCs), who will represent them on the 18 district councils for the next four years. There will be another 27 ex-officio members (rural committee chairmen in the New Territories) joining their ranks as DCs, but for the first time in the history of district councils all appointed seats have been abolished. 
DCs have a very prescriptive job role - despite the fact that they are paid quite handsomely - compared to elected councilors with executive powers in local councils in Britain. They act as consultees to the government, under the supervision of the Home Affairs Department (HAD), for their views on district-related matters such as the provision of public facilities or priorities of government programs. They are also responsible for ensuring funds allocated to the districts are spent on environmental improvements, promotion of recreational and cultural activities as well as community activities. 
No doubt their views and voices will be heard but unfortunately they do not have the executive powers to make the final decisions. Hong Kong' system is unlike Britain's local government system where elected councilors can exercise executive powers once decisions have been reached with a majority vote. It must be frustrating for DCs to get themselves elected on promises to represent their local citizens. The outcomes might not be the ones they or their constituents want. 
Despite the limitations to the remit of DCs, it does not stop a lot of political parties putting up prospective candidates to contest seats in the forthcoming election. I can see two dichotomies emerging as a result. First, candidates elected to be DCs will be required to work alongside political party lines, which might not be what local residents want. Second, local citizens will have inflated expectations of the power of their votes that DCs will not be able to deliver. Judging from some of the slogans posted by "pan-democratic" parties, I am not at all surprised that some constituents might think the raison d'tre of their DCs is to bring about constitutional changes to Hong Kong, something well beyond the functions DCs are expected to perform. 
I have further concerns about the current situation. If DCs are elected to perform politically motivated tasks, how relevant will they be in relation to getting things done locally, besides raising concerns at meetings? District councils might be supervised by the HAD, but do they have any powers to supervise the performance of DCs? How can the government ascertain whether DCs are value for money? Last but not least, how can the government ensure these elected individuals can genuinely represent their local citizens and as a whole contribute more to the well-being of the people of Hong Kong? 
Some commentators would even go so far as to suggest that political affiliations and politics in the Legislative Council (LegCo) can be echoed in district councils. If that is the case - and with what has been happening in LegCo both recently and over the last few years - what chance is there, if any, for district councils to function for the benefits of the people who elected them? 
Since prospective DCs are affiliated to different political parties, it is pretty obvious that their manifestos have been "politicized". I have even noticed there are some parties which only publicize jingoistic slogans with no district council-related manifestos to show to the electorate at all. For me, this is both offensive and disrespectful to their potential voters. It would be a travesty if they should receive any votes at all. 
The relevance of DCs to their electorates will disappear altogether if their prime aim for getting themselves elected is to push forward issues such as constitutional changes, democracy, freedom and opposition to government policies. 
Among the DCs, five will also be elected into "super district councilor seats" of LegCo and they will also become members in the legislature. Is there really a need for this duality of roles? 
In Britain, councilors and members of parliament (MPs) have totally different roles. If councils would like to propose changes to the law, MPs will be there to forward their views to the relevant ministers or parliament itself. When MPs have to deal with issues raised by their constituents in relation to the work of local councils, the line of communication is always open regardless of the fact that councilors and MPs might come from different ends of the political spectrum. 
In order to improve the relevance and performance of district councils, I would suggest that more active citizenship programs could be introduced to address the current imbalance, while HAD could introduce performance reviews of DCs on at least an annual basis, and reassess the financial rewards system to deter the number of full-time politicized consultees. Voters' empowerment is the key to ensuring DCs are accountable to them - and not to the political parties to which they belong to. 




(HK Edition 11/09/2015 page9)

