


      A new political organization called the Progressive Lawyers Group (PLG) was officially established on Jan 26 in Hong Kong. The PLG introduces itself on its Facebook page as "a group of Hong Kong lawyers dedicated to promoting core values of the rule of law, judicial independence, democracy, human rights, freedom, and justice. It was founded by three practicing lawyers, who serve as conveners."
      
        It is nothing unusual when a group of Hong Kong-based barristers and solicitors form a political organization, merely one of several to appear in recent months. What is unusual, however, and what is worrying to many people, is that the PLG sounds very much like the ultra-radical party, People Power, whose leader Leung Kwok-hung, also known as "Long Hair", is a lawmaker and one of Hong Kong's most radical politicians. Leung is not a lawyer and gives people the impression he can break the law whenever he wants. But the PLG's political philosophy is equally as questionable and outrageous.
        
          Let's take a look at PLG's detailed introductory description from Facebook. The key words it uses in the beginning are "lawyers" and "progress". The next two lines state: "Law is the foundation of all political systems. Law is also the foundation of all civil societies." I have no problem with these sentences, even though the group seems to have second thoughts about them.
          
            Then in the fourth paragraph it says, "In any polity, when those in power exercise their political power vested by citizens or implement policies, they are subject to restraints imposed upon them by the legal system and by the law, so that they cannot abuse their power. This is the essence of the rule of law." This sentence intrigued me. To my knowledge the rule of law means that every citizen in society is governed by the law, including lawmakers and government officials. But why does the PLG feel the rule of law only applies to "those in power"?
            
              As I read on it becomes clear to me the PLG is much more interested in defying the Hong Kong and central governments on certain issues rather than anything else. Sure enough, its true intentions are revealed in the following paragraphs: "Alas, Hong Kong is facing unprecedented legal and political challenges. Conservatism and so-called stability now trumps all else. Our city risks losing its shine in this ferocious storm." Without specifying what "conservatism" refers to, this paragraph tells me it could be anything which the PLG dislikes - such as "so-called stability". I wonder what the Conservative Party of Britain or the Republican Party of the United States would have to say about "conservatism" in this context. It's such a shame that, instead of explaining why there is "so-called" before "stability", the PLG decides to scare us with a vision of gloom and doom. Are Hong Kong people supposed to believe their city will still "shine" if it rids itself of "conservatism" and "so-called stability"? How?
              
                "The rule of law has been misrepresented by those in positions of power as demanding submission and for all to obey." Really, "progressive lawyers", do you mean all "those in positions of power"? Does the word "those" include judges and legislators, particularly those who agree with you? Please don't tell me that was the reason why you joined the illegal "Occupy Central" movement, supported its unconstitutional demands and applauded its unlawful and violent tactics.
                
                  "Judicial independence has become a value where those in power are demanding its surrender in the face of various forms of 'national interest'." I guess this sentence refers to the debate over whether the judiciary is part of the governing bodies, as is the legislature. But the PLG has not confirmed this. And I need to know if this means the PLG wants the judiciary to ignore certain forms of "national interest" or all of them. Let's not forget all the justices on the bench of the Court of Final Appeal of the Hong Kong SAR were appointed by the Chief Executive and approved by the central government. What does this practice mean to "judicial independence"? Apparently the PLG has a lot of explaining to do on this.
                  
                    "Democracy has been packaged by the lies of those in power into a monster that offers citizens no genuine choice." Wow! If this refers to the framework decision reached by the National People's Congress Standing Committee on Aug 31 last year, I wonder what "genuine choice" the PLG really has to offer us. I hope it's not the kind offered by "Occupy" supporters in their "electronic referendum" held last year. This gave people three practically identical proposals to choose from.
                    
                      The next two sentences discuss the plight of human rights and freedoms at the hands of "those in power". But it falls short of pointing a finger at anyone specific, and something about justice being all but forgotten by "those in power". Somehow I don't believe it also includes the blatant infringement of many people's basic rights and freedoms by the "occupiers" last year. Why the PLG cannot be specific is beyond me. Is it because the judges and opposition lawmakers are clearly among "those in power"?
                      
                        The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
                        
(HK Edition 02/02/2015 page1)

