



A walkout staged by pro-establishment lawmakers - a failed attempt to trigger a quorum call in the Legislative Council (LegCo) during last week's crucial vote on political reform - has become the butt of ridicule in the media and cyberspace, making "wait for Uncle Fat" one of the hottest searches online. 
However, the serious setback to attaining universal suffrage in 2017 is certainly not something Hong Kong people should be making fun of. 
The public should be aware that by sensationalizing the regrettable blunder, the opposition has been trying to dodge responsibility for brutally slaughtering the democratic aspirations of Hong Kong people. Remarks from several prominent opposition camp figures have laid bare their well-planned motives to divert public attention. 
The hard truth is that the opposition lawmakers have virtually strangled the fetus of democracy waiting to be born in 2017. The election of the Chief Executive by "one man, one vote" will be further delayed, and introducing universal suffrage for all LegCo members further deferred. 
Before the LegCo veto last week, up to 5 million eligible voters in the city were actually within striking distance of achieving "one man, one vote" - where they would be able to cast the ballot for their preferred candidates. 
Ironically, it is none but those self-proclaimed "vanguards of democracy" who have chosen to deprive the people of the right to practice their electoral freedom. As a result, sincere efforts made by the central and SAR governments as well as all sectors of society over the past 20 months have come to naught. The opposition, the biggest stumbling block, is squarely to blame for the failure of the electoral reform proposal. 
In the immediate aftermath of the rejection of the reform package, many dutiful pro-establishment lawmakers took the initiative to contact the Liaison Office of the Central People's Government in the Hong Kong SAR and explain what happened. 
This was a good move and worthy of praise. As prescribed in the Basic Law, the central government has constitutional rights and obligations to exercise jurisdiction over the Hong Kong SAR. But Alan Leong Kah-kit and other opposition leaders denounced such a responsible and accountable move as "self-destructive". 
These politicians obviously forget - or deliberately ignore - the fact that, as part of the country, Hong Kong should never stray beyond the jurisdiction of the central government. And sensitive and crucial political issues, such as universal suffrage, are certainly not an internal matter for Hong Kong to decide on its own. 
While the opposition is trying hard to dodge responsibility for dashing the SAR's hopes for universal suffrage, the community should focus on the perpetrators and make them pay in future elections. 

(HK Edition 06/22/2015 page8)

