
Raymond So says that those promoting democracy in Hong Kong greatly weaken their case when they resort to violent or aggressive behavior 
The development of democracy in Hong Kong has reached a critical stage. There are people supporting or opposing the government's proposed constitutional reforms. In an open society, this should be considered normal and is hardly worth mentioning. The basic principle that needs to be observed, however, is to respect different voices and opinions. Hong Kong needs to accommodate those opposing views even though we may not agree with them. The key point is that differences of opinion can be respected in a civilized manner. This should be an important element in the development of democracy in Hong Kong. 
The problem we now face is, however, that the current developments have greatly deviated from rational conduct. There is no fruitful discussion on the topic, but a simple division according to the views of the two camps. Worse still, opposite views have, at times, become the cause of discontent and violence. This has somehow become the habit of certain members of the opposition camp. In simple words, there is a worrying trend which could see Hong Kong turn into a place in which violence dominates political discourse. 
A case in point is what happened two weeks ago at a debating competition for high school students. Chief Secretary Carrie Lam was the guest of honor at the event. Because of the significant role she plays in constitutional reform, the chief secretary was naturally targeted. Numerous young people rushed into the competition hall and severely disrupted the contest. 
As a public figure, the chief secretary always attracts attention from members of the opposition. They miss no opportunity to protest in front of her in order to gain media attention. The unspoken rule, however, is that such demonstrations should only be done to make a point and not to cause serious disruption. After all, what the opposition really wants is public attention. However, what happened during the debate was a violation of this unspoken rule. Not only did Lam suffer verbal abuse, but students, teachers and parents also had to put up with these disruptions. To the students, this was particularly difficult as they had put considerable effort into preparing for this event. Their efforts ultimately ended in disappointment. 
I must stress that such behavior is wrong and cannot be tolerated. We should never have to put up with aggressive behavior like this. Whether one supports or opposes the government, views should not be expressed through rude, aggressive conduct. The problem is, however, there are those who defend such behavior as an expression of "real" democracy. These young people often regard themselves as the true defenders of democracy. The sad thing is that some in the media support such outrageous behavior. Moreover, when young people are praised for doing things like this, they end up doing even worse things. Much of the media makes no attempt to question such behavior or ask whether it is acceptable to society. They feel this type of conduct can be justified for political reasons. This attitude is quite incorrect. 
Many negative things have happened in the past under the name of democracy. However, many people clearly do not learn from history. Some believe they can violate the law because they are fighting for democracy. In other words, you can do whatever you want as long as you can think of a way to link your behavior to the promotion of democracy. The sad thing is that hardly anybody rejects or condemns such views. I cannot see the logic behind such an attitude. 
As individuals capable of critical thinking, people need to be responsible for their views and actions. We cannot resort to the use of violence in the drive for democratic advancement. Many people seem to forget rational thinking and then try to justify bad behavior. It is not surprising that young people consider many violent activists to be heroes. This can only hinder the development of democracy; it will never help its progress. 
Such behavior is likely to reoccur in future debate on constitutional reform. This will only hurt the progress of constitutional reform in Hong Kong. It is sad that we cannot do more to stop this from happening. 




(HK Edition 05/29/2015 page10)

