
Hong Kong's opposition camp has been warned that how they vote on the upcoming electoral reform package in the city's legislature will be their chance to show their allegiance to the central government and their commitment to the "One Country, Two Systems" principle. 
It's no longer an issue about democracy, argued Peking University Law Professor Rao Geping, and the success of the SAR's bid for universal suffrage hinges on recognition of "One Country" and the national Constitution by Hong Kong society. 
Rao, who is also a member of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Basic Law Committee that advises the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC), delivered the message at a seminar in Hong Kong last Friday at which he stressed the need to scrutinize Chief Executive candidates thoroughly. 
He accused the opposition of being backed by foreign forces in confronting the central leadership and promoting the illusion that Hong Kong is an independent political entity. 
The opposition members also consider electoral reform as their last chance to exert control over Hong Kong, but the central government will not allow that to happen, he said. 



Beijing has the right to refuse appointing a Chief Executive-elect, but to avoid any political aftershock, it's essential to ensure that all candidates meet the "minimum" political requirements provided under the Basic Law. 
In this respect, the Nominating Committee is an indispensable gatekeeper in the election of Hong Kong's leader by universal suffrage, and the 1,200-strong committee will prevent the city from falling into populism. 
Rao noted that since the community began looking into options for constitutional reform in early 2013, the mechanism embedded in the Basic Law has been discredited by the opposition camp as "fake" universal suffrage and this has become an obstacle to reform. 
He criticized the misconception among many Hong Kong people that constitutional reform is the SAR's "domestic affair", stressing it has been made very clear in the Basic Law that the NPCSC has the final say in the city's election setup. 
Rao also took a swipe at what he called "biased" news organizations for promoting the opposition's misleading interpretations of the Basic Law, saying some people are "buying it" because they have been struggling to adapt to the new constitutional order established since 1997. 
Another Basic Law Committee member, Barrister Maria Tam Wai-chu, lamented that the Western concept of civil society has fueled confrontational politics in Hong Kong. 
Consensus politics that have underpinned Hong Kong's success in the past, on the other hand, has been losing ground, and Hong Kong is at the crossroads, she told the seminar. 
Meanwhile, Civic Party lawmaker Ronny Tong Ka-wah is due to launch his think tank "Path of Democracy" on Monday with the focus on the "One Country, Two Systems" concept. 
Tong, who has been working hard to keep talks on constitutional reform alive, has said he will continue to try to break the impasse before fellow legislators are due to vote on the reform package in about two weeks. 
kahon@chinadailyhk.com 
(HK Edition 06/08/2015 page4)

