
Some people like to call others racist, but what exactly is meant by racism or, for that matter, discrimination? This question has no simple answers. 
A series of promo posters released by the Chinese Football Association (CFA), including one telling fans not to underestimate Hong Kong's "diverse" team of players with "black, yellow and white skins", has been called offensive because it "implies racism". 
Writing in the International Business Times, Duncan Hewitt was more sympathetic toward the CFA. "Some sociologists have argued that emphasis on skin color or ethnic differences is common in China - a relatively homogeneous society - and does not necessarily imply racism," he reminded his readers. 
Hewitt noted that Chinese football commentators routinely seem to feel the need to comment on the color of black players in top European football leagues. Some people argued that implying that a player of Afro-Caribbean origin is likely to run particularly fast is "casual racism". 
But before we can decide if someone is a "casual racist," we should first try to understand what racism is. Merriam Webster defines racism as "a belief that race is the primary determinant of human traits and capacities and racial differences produce an inherent superiority of a particular race," or "racial prejudice or discrimination". 



The question is what happens when a belief is not merely an opinion, but is also supported by science? 
Since 1968, the world record holders in the men's 100-meter dash have been black athletes. And since 1912, when the International Association of Athletics Federations started keeping track of the record holders in that event, only 10 non-black athletes out of 38 individuals have held the title. 
Why are we seeing this pattern? People naturally begin to argue that black athletes' overwhelming dominance in certain sports may have something to do with their being black. But even casual mention that genetic differences exist between people can ignite a firestorm of controversy and even hurt someone's career. In a speech before the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1995, distinguished middle-distance athlete, neurologist and retired Oxford dean, Sir Roger Bannister, was showered with ridicule for arguing that "all athletes are not created equal". "I am prepared to risk political incorrectness," he said, "by drawing attention to the seemingly obvious but under stressed fact that black sprinters and black athletes in general all seem to have certain natural anatomical advantages." 
Sir Roger's comment is supported by a study published in 2010 by researchers at Howard University and Duke University. This suggests that black athletes outperform athletes from other races in running because of physical differences in the length of their limbs and the structure of their bodies. The center of gravity tends to be higher in the bodies of black people. The height of a person's center of gravity affects how fast their feet are moving when they hit the ground. 
"There is a whole body of evidence showing that there are distinct differences in body types among blacks and whites," said Edward Jones from the Howard University. "These are real patterns being described here. Whether the fastest sprinters are Jamaican, African or Canadian, most of them can be traced back generally to Western Africa." 
Everyone is entitled to an opinion in this age of democracy, although this does not mean all opinions are of equal merit. We have beliefs supported by facts or science, and beliefs which contradict the facts and also science. 
In some ways, Hong Kong has become a strange place. When a Hong Kong person calls a mainlander a "locust" this is not considered racism. When a sports commentator says, perhaps out of awe (but certainly not out of contempt), that a black athlete is fast, it is regarded as racism. 
I would argue that racism should be defined only as a belief "that race is the primary determinant of human traits and capacities" when it is not supported by facts or science. 
Let us finish with another scientific observation that is relevant to the current social debate. A paper which was published online on May 18, 2015 in the journal Nature Genetics has shed light on an age-old debate: Do our genes make us who we are, or is it our environment? The analysis - involving more than 14.5 million pairs of twins from 39 countries - indicates that nature and nurture are virtually tied. In other words, genes and environment exert equal influence on us. 
Think about the implication of this in regard to the current debate over the causes of homosexuality. If it is caused by "nature," then we can only accept who a person is. But if "nurture" also plays a part, then social policies such as what we teach in schools may also shape a person's sexuality. 

(HK Edition 06/22/2015 page8)

