
Chief Secretary for Administration Carrie Lam has been conducting a new round of talks with lawmakers from the opposition and also with independent lawmakers. This is in the latest bid to persuade them to endorse the government's constitutional reform package, which will be officially tabled to the Legislative Council on June 17. 
This move comes amid prevailing pessimism; many doubt whether such dialogue is meaningful. But Constitutional Affairs Secretary Raymond Tam said on Thursday, "The dialogue is meaningful in itself". Indeed, praise should be given to the dutiful SAR government for its continued efforts to "lobby for support till the very end". 
Democracy is never an easy path to tread. While an overwhelming majority of people in Hong Kong aspire to tick the ballot box in 2017, some feel the package falls short of their expectations and some worry that "pocket it first means pocket it forever". But a bunch of die-hard legislators have claimed they have no more "lingering hopes" and will veto it. 
Whatever your view, the truth is that, democracies come in many different shapes and sizes, and each has its own strengths and weaknesses. As such, each jurisdiction has to devise democracy consistent with the actual situation. In Hong Kong's case, the package is the best possible one, at least for now. Once in place, universal suffrage is here to stay, and the electoral system can be further refined, or optimized. 
The government's sincerity and resolve over the reform bill is based on a firm conviction that implementing universal suffrage for the 2017 CE election in line with the Basic Law and the Aug 31 decision of the National People's Congress Standing Committee, is definitely beneficial to Hong Kong. 
If the proposal is accepted by Legislative Council, "one person, one vote" will finally be achieved. This is a golden opportunity that must not be cast aside easily. If the package is voted down, and universal suffrage fails to arrive as scheduled in 2017, all the previous efforts go down the drain. This will have a very negative effect on the democratic development and governance of Hong Kong. 
As a Western adage goes, "Where there is a will, there is a way." Even if there is a slim chance of the reform proposal getting passed, we should not give up but continue to rally public and LegCo support. It is time to resolve this most thorny issue that has plagued Hong Kong for years, and leave all the political bickering behind. Once this is done, the city can focus its efforts on economic development and improving people's livelihoods. 




(HK Edition 06/05/2015 page11)

