






Chinese President Xi Jinping (R) meets with a delegation from Myanmar's National League for Democracy (NLD), headed by NLD chairperson Aung San Suu Kyi, at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing, China, June 11, 2015. [Photo/Xinhua]
Aung San Suu Kyi, leader of Myanmar's National League for Democracy, stated plainly at her meeting with leader of the Communist Party of China Xi Jinping in Beijing on Thursday that it is important for Myanmar and China to continue developing friendly relations, especially as "neighbors cannot be selected".
A long-time figure in Myanmar's political life, Suu Kyi is well-known in China for her perseverance and devotion to her country. Her position as Myanmar's opposition leader means her high-profile visit from Wednesday through Sunday has garnered much attention.
The CPC communicates not only with foreign political parties that share the same or similar ideology, but also with those having a different political vision. It is willing to enhance cooperation and exchanges with political parties in foreign countries.
China and Myanmar established formal diplomatic relations 65 years ago. As Xi said, the two "are close, friendly neighbors", and "have become a community of common interests and common destiny sharing weal and woe".
Since the turn of the new century, as bilateral trade has progressed on a fast track of growth, some disturbances have emerged as well, affecting Chinese-funded projects in Myanmar. China has also become a victim of the armed conflict in northern Myanmar spilling over the border, as errant bombs have led to casualties on the Chinese side.
Stability in the border area between China and Myanmar caters to the common interests of the two neighbors, which share a border of 2,000 kilometers. Myanmar has unshirkable responsibility to maintain stability along the border.
As a politician with growing influence in Myanmar affairs, Suu Kyi must have a thorough understanding of the special bond between the two countries.
Xi has confidence in the future, as he said he believed "the Myanmar side will also maintain a consistent stance on China-Myanmar relationship and be committed to advancing friendly ties, no matter how its domestic situation changes".
Consolidation of reciprocal cooperation will ensure both sides benefit from their friendship.
Suu Kyi's visit has helped establish more channels of communication for the two countries to cement mutual trust, and as she said, "will promote further development of friendly relations between the two peoples, parties and countries".
