
A year after the 79-day illegal 'Occupy Central' campaign began, some of the city's politicians and academics looked back at the most destructive movement since the 1997 handover of Hong Kong. Joseph Li asked them to analyze how the protests started, how it slipped out of control and headed for failure, and what lessons can be learned from it. 



The "Occupy Central" movement was an illegal campaign that undermined the governance and rule of law in Hong Kong, according to Regina Ip Lau Suk-yee. 
Emboldened by their large numbers, the protesters violated the law and tried to force the government to accept their demands. Had the government yielded, Ip feared that would have set a very dangerous precedent. 
Ip said that the occupation has wounded society and it will take time to heal. She disagreed with the three "Occupy" organizers - Benny Tai Yiu-ting, Chan Kin-man and Reverend Chu Yiu-ming, who continued to maintain that if certain government officials had stepped down the occupation would have stopped immediately. 
"I heard demands that if Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying resigned, the occupiers would leave the scene," she said. "I disagree with this because it is not the problem of just one person. If an official quits today due to public pressure, more may resign tomorrow. That will result in endless disasters and Hong Kong will become ungovernable." 
Since a very large number of young people joined in the occupation, Ip believed the government should take effective steps to tackle problems affecting youth, such as housing and career prospects, to calm their anger. 
Ip believed a good opportunity arose to end the occupation when government officials held talks with the student representatives. "That was a perfect opportunity for the students to withdraw, but they were over-ambitious. The three organizers should have persuaded the students to stop the occupation more proactively. They should not blame the students today for the deadlock." 
Ip also blasted the opposition camp in the legislature and protesters for demanding "public nomination" and "real universal suffrage", calling them empty political slogans. 
Ip, who was secretary for security in charge of the disciplinary forces, said the police, on the whole, did a very good job in handling the occupation and backed their use of tear gas. 
In her view the use of tear gas aimed to disperse the huge crowds and keep them at a safe distance, as they were intent on moving toward the government offices. She added that tear gas does not cause permanent bodily harm and is widely used around the world to control public order disturbances. 
She was disappointed that numerous prosecutions against the protesters have been thrown out of court, while in the case of some convicted offenders only a light penalty was imposed. Meanwhile, the ringleaders of the occupation have yet to be prosecuted. 
"Convictions under the Public Order Ordinance do not carry heavy penalties, but those under the Crimes Ordinance do carry heavy penalties for offenses such as criminal damage," she explained. "But the Department of Justice may be overloaded, while it has been very difficult for police to gather evidence in such chaotic situations." 



Starry Lee Wai-king said the "Occupy Central" movement was not only illegal but also "anti-democracy" and "anti-freedom". However, the three organizers and the opposition camp in the legislature misjudged Beijing's stance on constitutional reform in Hong Kong and applied wholly inappropriate methods. Perhaps the only positive side of the occupation was, she said, that it revealed the hypocrisy of the opposition camp. 
"I have always described 'Occupy' as self-harming behavior which only hurt Hong Kong people and society, while the central authorities were the least affected," Lee commented. 
"It was anti-democracy because they used undemocratic means to pursue democracy. It was anti-freedom because they occupied the roads to deprive other people's freedom of movement. But their radical actions completely failed to shake the central government." 
The "Occupy" campaign harmed Hong Kong's international image very badly, Lee lamented. Some of her British friends even asked her if the city had fallen, seized by the protesters. The drawn-out protest also harmed the economy and tourism, and sparked counter-protests and violent confrontations. Yet the opposition camp attempted to rationalize the radicals' actions. 
Lee said she was saddened that society had been ravaged by the occupation. In the past, people had opinions but remained reasonable and "middle of the road". But the occupation had divided society into supporters of the "yellow ribbon", which symbolized the occupation, and the "blue ribbon", which represented people who were against the movement. 
"The illegal occupation has inflicted the deepest wound on the rule of law in Hong Kong," she said. "In the past, Hong Kong residents were very law-abiding. But as the occupation got underway, people's awareness of their responsibility to obey the law was seriously damaged. We saw people protesting radically and challenging police officers like mobsters." 
Lee praised the police for doing a good job, on the whole, in dealing with the occupation and bringing it to an end peacefully without serious injuries. 
Lee felt public opinion played a very big part in ending the illegal occupation. "During that period, I had debates with the students and they knew public opinion was not on their side. Also, many moderate people came out and rationally spoke up against unlawful behavior and violence," she remarked. 
But Lee remained somewhat forgiving of the students. "I believe the majority of the students had good intentions and were passionate. They resorted to the illegal occupation, perhaps, because they were influenced by other people. But they need to bear responsibility for what they did. It may ruin their careers (if they are prosecuted)," she said. 
At the same time, she criticized the three organizers, blaming them for not doing enough to persuade the students to leave the occupied zones. 
She further blasted the opposition lawmakers for staging a "non-cooperation movement" in the Legislative Council after the occupied zones were cleared. "They were irresponsible when they endlessly filibustered and delayed government proposals," she complained. "In the end, it was Hong Kong people who suffered." 



Ng Chau-pei called the "Occupy Central" movement a planned illegal campaign in the false name of "democracy", which seriously harmed social order and the rule of law in Hong Kong. As a result, the legislation of the national security law according to Article 23 of the Basic Law could not be more pressing. 
It is Ng's belief that the "Occupy" organizers' motives were unacceptable because they threatened to occupy the streets before the consultation on the electoral reform began, to try to force the central government to accept their political demands. 
They were not pursuing democracy, he said. If they really wanted to take democracy forward, they should not veto the reform package and deprive Hong Kong people of their right to choose the Chief Executive by "one person, one vote". 
"Their aim was to veto the constitutional reform and then overthrow the government. And remember, in the early stages the foreign media called it a 'color revolution'," he pointed out. 
"Similar tactics were used as in other countries. They first deployed the students to go to the frontline. They planned to intensify the incident. They would be happy to see bloodshed so that they could further ignite trouble, hoping to lure more people to come out against the government and force it to yield." 
Ng believed the organizers were backed by external forces. Throughout the occupation, which the protesters called "the umbrella revolution", he marveled at their endless supply of cash and resources. Ng also believed it was no coincidence that Benny Tai Yiu-ting, one of the three "Occupy" initiators, failed to give a detailed account of the donations he received. At the same time, a few media organizations, notably Apple Daily, played a very big role in inciting the protesters. 
Ng further blasted the so-called "Occupy Central with Love and Peace" moniker as a lie. "Did you see any peace when they occupied the streets, or stormed the Central Government Complex?" 
Ng said the opposition camp was wrong to try to overthrow the decision that the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC) made on Aug 31, 2014 with regard to the method for the CE election in 2017. 
"The decision, which came after consultation with Hong Kong's different sectors, has a legal standing and the central government won't change it easily," he said. 
During the occupation, Ng, with others, set up the Alliance for Peace and Democracy, which obtained 1.81 million signatures from Hong Kong residents against the illegal occupation. 
On the whole, Ng was pleased with the way the SAR government, with the trust of the central authorities, handled the occupation, although some have said its duration of 79 days was too long. 
"The SAR government should be credited for handling the occupation properly and patiently, while police exercised a high degree of restraint," he commented. "Had Beijing given certain instructions or set a deadline for clearing the occupied zones, the SAR government could well have used other methods to create a different outcome. Looking back, it was the best way to end the occupation." 



James Tien Pei-chun was opposed to the "Occupy Central" movement. Not only did he think it was against the law because protesters occupied the streets and blocked traffic, he also disapproved of the way the three organizers, the student groups and "pan-democrats" pursued their own type of democracy. 
He singled out the Civic Party, saying that although its legislators are legal professionals, the party openly defied the law through so-called civil disobedience. 
The illegal occupation had affected the city's economy and international image, he said. Fortunately, the impact was transient. But for society, the effect of the occupation was much worse. 
"I opposed the occupation of streets and the way they pursued what they called 'real universal suffrage'," he said. "To many foreign people, as they saw the scenes of protests on TV, Hong Kong looked to be in chaos at that time. Whenever we explained to foreigners such as businessmen the central government's position on electoral reform, they accepted it, given that Hong Kong is a special administrative region and not a sovereign state." 
He said the SAR government should have taken stringent action to remove protesters and tents early on, instead of letting the occupation drag on for 79 days. 
In his opinion the "pan-democrats" lost the opportunity to take democracy forward, by insisting on what they called "public nomination" as the international standard after the central government promised Hong Kong could choose its Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017. 
"If the 'pan-democrats' were willing to accept the 'one person, one vote' arrangement which Beijing guaranteed, they could still pursue in coming years a more liberal nomination method and a lower threshold, and nominate moderate candidates like Ronny Tong Ka-wah or Anthony Cheung Bing-leung," he remarked. 
Tien rued that the opposition camp wasted the chance by adopting an "all or nothing" attitude. After the electoral reform was vetoed in June, he knew the SAR government would not revisit it within the remaining tenure. 



In the opinion of Lau Siu-kai, the "Occupy Central" movement was the biggest political confrontation since the handover of Hong Kong - if not in its entire history - for it has obviously affected the governance of the SAR. 
The unlawful occupation was sparked by opposition against the constitutional reform framework related to the 2017 Chief Executive election by universal suffrage that the NPCSC had just handed down. 
Lau praised the central government for remaining firm on the framework and not yielding to political pressure. At the same time, he said, it avoided intervening, as far as possible, in the SAR's political turmoil, which resembled the "color revolution" seen in other countries in recent years. 
"The central government authorities decided to let the protesters stay because its evaluation was that Hong Kong could bear with the situation, knowing the occupation would not intensify to paralyze the government and the economy," Lau said. 
He said Beijing also believed the longer the unlawful occupation went on, the more Hong Kong citizens would become impatient - and the illegal protests would gradually disappear. 
"Hong Kong people's biggest gain in this movement was to make the central authorities see they are politically pragmatic, cherish prosperity and stability, have the ability to solve their own problems, and do not tolerate the radical actions and illegal activities of the opposition camp," he commented. 
Lau also said the occupation exposed the many weaknesses of the opposition camp and radical groups, including radical young people. They were loosely organized and their actions were badly conceived. They also lacked good leadership and overestimated the support they could rally from Hong Kong residents. 
As Beijing remained firm, the opposition camp split, prompting the moderates to stay away from the radicals. This was because some of them thought they would have no future if they continued to confront the central government, he said. 
Lau said he thought that after the occupation and the veto of the electoral reform package, Beijing had been looking at the political parties and organizations in the opposition camp and considering which ones they could cooperate with and which ones should be isolated. 
"The opposition camp would be wrong to think that there have been no developments since the protest," he said. "The recent meeting between Feng Wei, deputy director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, showed that Beijing wants to unite those it can. Meetings with certain moderate 'democrats' unaffiliated to political parties may follow, while the radicals will be distanced."  



James Sung Lap-kung said that despite the three "Occupy Central" organizers claiming they had a lofty goal, the movement was illegal. But a year after the occupation began, the organizers and many well-known protesters have still not been prosecuted. 
In Sung's view, there is ample evidence to charge them. He hopes the government will show resolve and not let the public feel it is afraid of prosecuting the "big crocodiles". If the ringleaders are not prosecuted, there will be no deterrent to people who choose to defy the law, especially young people. 
Looking back at the occupation, Sung said the trio of organizers initially intended to pressure the central government to grant them the type of universal suffrage that they hoped for. Yet the movement was an obvious failure in several ways, he said. 
First, they grossly underestimated the firmness of the central government. They thought Beijing would be unwilling to see scenes of conflict in Hong Kong and would therefore yield to their demands. 
Second, they had shortlisted three universal suffrage models for a so-called referendum. Ridiculously, all three models contained the element of "public nomination" that contravenes the Basic Law, leaving many moderate democrats disappointed and finding it difficult to bargain with the central government. The Hong Kong Bar Associations' statement that "public nomination" is against the Basic Law was a fatal blow to them. 
Third, two student groups hijacked the movement after joining in, and from then on the movement became far too radical and uncontrolled. 
Fourth, the dialogue between Chief Secretary for Administration Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor and the students should have provided a way out. Yet when the students returned to the main stage in the Admiralty occupied zone, they "changed face" and criticized the government, and thus blew away the chance of peaceful evacuation. 
"The trio of organizers was taking a big political gamble at that time by directly challenging the central authorities," said Sung. "Yet they failed to understand the new leadership's strong determination to handle constitutional reform in Hong Kong in a gradual and orderly manner and not to lose control of the nomination of the Chief Executive election candidates, regardless of intervention from Hong Kong's opposition camp and Western influences." 
Sung believed "Occupy" had torn society apart and inflicted a deep wound on Hong Kong. "The wound is still bleeding and I don't know when it will heal," he said, citing examples of arguments among family members and long-time friends. "The biggest wound is the damage to the rule of law as one of Hong Kong's core values, as some people thought they did not need to obey the law as long as they felt what they did was right." 
Looking forward, Sung suggests more training for frontline police officers to deal with crowds in a more tactful manner, which would also give the opposition no chance to find fault with the police. 
He also wants the Department of Justice to prosecute law-breakers without hesitation if there is sufficient evidence. 
Contact the writer at joseph@chinadailyhk.com 

(HK Edition 09/29/2015 page7)

