
In my previous article on this topic, I talked about the need for Hong Kong people of all ages and political persuasions to arrive at an objective assessment of their colonial heritage, so that they can look forward collectively to the future unencumbered by any idealized notions of the past. 
A few days after writing the article, I received, quite by chance, a Facebook post from a page entitled "We Support Hong Kong Reuniting with the United Kingdom". Above a leaflet containing a picture of the last governor, Chris Patten, and the words "Hong Kong is British!" the post proclaimed that reunification with Britain is equivalent to "Genuine Choice of Democracy for Hong Kong". 
For me this post was about as welcome as a message in a foreign language from someone I do not even know. For, as I said in the previous article, "there is no place in the modern world for colonialism". So I decided to write a comment explaining that "genuine choice of democracy" does not even exist in the UK. 
Soon afterwards I received a reply saying, "We Hongkongers demand our right of self-determination to choose the UK We also want Her Majesty the Queen coming back to become the head of state of Hong Kong." I was also invited to sign an online petition asking UK Prime Minister David Cameron to "Reunite Hong Kong with the United Kingdom". I politely declined, pointing out that, as a confirmed republican, I do not even want the Queen to be the head of state of the UK. 
The last time I checked, the online petition had 661 signatories. So this is clearly not a popular movement by any stretch of the imagination. But it is, I think, an illustration of a tendency among an extreme minority of Hong Kong people today to envision a future independent of the motherland. Just look at the proliferation of small but vocal pro-independence groups, not to mention the openly "localist" stance of members of the opposition camp such as the Civic Party's Claudia Mo Man-ching, the Neo-Democrat Gary Fan Kwok-wai and People Power's Raymond Wong Yuk-man. 
And yet imagining a future where Hong Kong is somehow separate from China is, frankly, delusional. Under the terms of the Basic Law, Hong Kong and the mainland are one country, and no amount of colonial nostalgia is ever going to change that. And Hong Kong people have no more right to "self-determination" than the people of the Isle of Wight, an island off the south coast of England and one of the UK's 83 counties. After all, it was only as a result of three successive acts of colonial aggression that Hong Kong was separated from the country in the first place. 
And why would we want to separate ourselves from the rest of China anyway? We depend on the mainland for over 70 percent of our water, over 90 percent of our fresh meat and vegetables, and over 50 percent of our electricity. Having benefited already from central government initiatives such as the Closer Economic Partnership Agreement and the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect, we stand to benefit still further as a major offshore center for renminbi trading and an important part of the "One Belt, One Road" initiative. 
Let us not forget, either, that most of the multinational companies that choose to base their Asia-Pacific operations here do so on the understanding that there are close ties between the SAR and the mainland, ties that would by no means be guaranteed if Hong Kong were somehow to become an independent state. The possible relocation of HSBC's headquarters to Hong Kong, for example, and many similar commercial initiatives resting on our close ties with the mainland, would undoubtedly be sunk by any prospect, however remote, of the city seceding from the rest of China. 
The fact is, then, that whatever the supporters of Hong Kong independence - or reunification with the UK - might say, the city's future is inextricably linked with that of the People's Republic. So rather than focusing on the impossible dream of independence, Hong Kong people of all descriptions - including even the most die-hard "localists" - should concentrate on embracing the practical constraints of "One Country, Two Systems" and maximizing the high degree of autonomy guaranteed to the SAR under the Basic Law. 
For by adopting a positive and pragmatic approach, Hong Kong people can succeed in protecting not only their unique values and institutions but also their enviable position as China's principal gateway to the rest of the world. 




(HK Edition 07/15/2015 page9)

