






Chinese Finance Minister Lou Jiwei answers questions during a press conference on the sidelines of the ongoing Third Session of the 12th National People's Congress (NPC) in Beijing, China, 06 March 2015.
At the concluding meeting of this year's plenary session of the National People's Congress, China's top legislature, the 2015 national budget received 304 no votes out of 2,483, the highest of all the eight reports the deputies voted on. Comments:
The budget report is impractical and lacks detailed information; therefore I voted "no" to the report. The Ministry of Finance should do more research and investigations about the reality instead of working behind closed doors.



Wang Mengshu, a deputy to the NPC, March 15
The voting result should encourage those responsible for drafting the budget to improve their performance. They should make information about the drafting process transparent to the public and the NPC. When the first draft is ready they could also solicit opinions from the whole of society before submitting it to the NPC, and write a report that includes the public's opinions as an attachment. Only when people understand the budget report will they support it.
Beijing News, March 16
The budget report is used primarily to regulate the government's tax collecting and use of the money; more negative votes mean the society has a higher sense of democracy and rule of law. It is also a warning to officials that people are paying more attention to how the money taken out of their pockets is being spent.
Liu Jianwen, a professor of financial law at Peking University, March 15
The budget materials contain nine pamphlets, each about 200 pages long; my group of 32 has only two copies and four hours, so everybody has only 15 minutes to read them. The time is hardly enough for me even to read through it. We call for a change in the budget procedure. NPC deputies need to get the materials long before voting, so as to have enough time to read and analyze them.
Jiang Hong, a professor at Shanghai University of Finance and Economics and a Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference National Committee member, March 13