


      Tony Kwok argues that Hong Kong courts must stop treating people committing illegal acts leniently because this is eroding respect for the rule of law in society
      
        Let me pose a brutally blunt question: When it comes to recent incidents on our streets, does Hong Kong now have law and order or flaw and disorder?
        
          Clearly law and order is an indispensable condition of any civilized society, and the most important factor in bringing this about is effective law enforcement and adequate deterrence. That is the basis of the "let crime pay" principle - whoever commits crime must bear the consequences.
          
            Take corruption for example. In the old days in Hong Kong, corruption was very prevalent and it was serious. When the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) was established in 1974, it transformed Hong Kong from one of the most corrupt places on earth to one of the cleanest. A key reason for its success was the strong backing of the judiciary. Over 75 percent of ICAC cases resulted in convictions and strong deterrent sentences. The then chief justice issued guidelines stipulating that any public servant convicted of bribery should be given a minimum of 12 months in prison unless there were mitigating circumstances.
            
              If we compare our corruption problems in the 1970s with the social disorder now rampant in Hong Kong, it is obvious we are disregarding the lesson of cause and effect. All too frequently we see young and radical protesters confronting the police with impunity. This culminated in the 79 chaotic days of "Occupy Central", when large crowds of people openly broke the law. They then launched "Occupy Mong Kok" at nights, which included the harassment of mainland tourists. Most recently, there was the student "occupation" of a high-level meeting of the University of Hong Kong (HKU) Council. Why are these young protesters unafraid of breaking the law? The reason is simple: There is no deterrence in response to their illegal conduct.
              
                Following "Occupy Central", many young people were taken to court for "obstructing the police", "assaulting police", breaking into the Legislative Council and causing damage, and so on. These are all serious offenses. Yet for most of them, if they pleaded not guilty they were acquitted and given the "benefit of the doubt". If they pleaded guilty, they were usually given a non-custodial sentence and walked out of the court.
                
                  Hence it is most refreshing to finally see a magistrate who has the courage to give a custodial sentence to a number of defendants for assaulting police and also for obstruction. Yet he was immediately threatened by many "pan-democratic" supporters. He has been the target of abuse outside court and on the Internet. These people seemed to forget that their "fight for democracy" is meant to ensure the maintenance of the rule of law in Hong Kong - and yet they are often trying to break the law.
                  
                    The Deputy Magistrate, Michael Chan Pik-kiu, said in his judgment: "If I do not hand down a deterrent sentence, the public might mistakenly think it is a trivial matter to assault police officers during protests." He added that the role of the police was to maintain order during protests, but people who tried to obstruct them were making their job harder.
                    
                      His judgment is clearly sound and well expressed, so that it should be a guiding principle for similar cases. Unfortunately his views are not always shared by other magistrates, who often rule differently.
                      
                        Allow me to cite an extreme case of this. A few years back I had to visit the Philippines frequently as their anti-corruption consultant. Because of the law and order problem there, particularly in Manila, I would avoid going out alone on the street at night. Then I learnt of a city in the south known to be their safest city. The reason was that its mayor gave his personal assurance to all police officers that they could shoot and kill any criminals found committing violent crime. While I am not saying we should emulate this "frontier justice", it does demonstrate the effectiveness of assured punishment!
                        
                          Today's young protesters do not believe they will suffer any dire consequences even if they confront, verbally abuse and assault police officers. They also believe they are entitled to break into any private and closed-door meetings held anywhere and detain and abuse people inside. The recent ugly scene at HKU Council meeting again clearly indicated that their self-righteous attitude has put them above the law - especially since they are being encouraged by "pan-democratic" politicians, journalists, academics and others.
                          
                            This case is now pending appeal. Let us hope that the Court of Appeal can take the opportunity to put the seriousness of these offenses into proper perspective and issue sentencing guidelines for the lower courts to deal with these common civil disorder cases. Hopefully this will send a stern message to the radicals.
                            
                              If a police officer was convicted of receiving a bribe from a member of the public, he could expect to be sent to jail for at least 12 months. So what should happen to a member of the public who assaults a police officer? Should he or she not go to jail, too?
                              
                                The author is a former deputy commissioner of the Independent Commission Against Corruption and is presently a university lecturer in Hong Kong and on the mainland.
                                
(HK Edition 08/13/2015 page10)

