


      The publication of the British foreign secretary's 36th report to Parliament on Hong Kong and Premier Li Keqiang's government work report to the National People's Congress came a week apart. But it was reassuring that they both reaffirmed the parameters required to guarantee Hong Kong's best interests.
      
        Both stated unequivocally that the "One Country, Two Systems" policy must be upheld and Hong Kong would continue to enjoy a high degree of autonomy.
        
          Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond is correct when he says it is the responsibility of Hong Kong people, the SAR government and the Chinese central government to determine arrangements in accordance with the Basic Law.
          
            Li, on the other hand, stressed that besides adherence to the Basic Law, any changes must be in accordance with the Constitution. This means Hong Kong's freedom and high degree of autonomy must operate under the "One Country, Two Systems" policy.
            
              In the 1980s the term Sino-British Joint Declaration came about because Britain sought a solution to the "question of Hong Kong". Thirty years later, it would be helpful if the foreign secretary stopped using this term in his reports. Things have moved on since the Joint Declaration was signed. The thriving global financial and economic center of Hong Kong can hardly be described as a "question".
              
                Furthermore, I believe neither Britain nor Hammond need have any concern about China's desire to maintain Hong Kong's high degree of autonomy and guarantee the lifestyle, rights and freedoms of the SAR.
                
                  In his report Li said that maintaining Hong Kong's long-term prosperity and stability remained a key objective of his government. To achieve this, the premier wants the SAR government to operate under the agreed legal framework; to develop its economy; to improve the livelihood of its citizens; to promote harmony; to introduce more exchanges and projects with the mainland and to improve competitiveness.
                  
                    These reassurances illustrate China's strong commitment to Hong Kong. There is no need for the foreign secretary to have any further concerns about Britain's "obligations" toward the SAR.
                    
                      His report included some of Hammond's statements, but they were made without further qualification. This forces the reader to question the validity of the statements.
                      
                        For example, he is "concerned by reports of pressure and intimidation against journalists". But he failed to qualify the sources of these reports.
                        
                          There is clearly no hard evidence to back up his comments. Surely, the foreign secretary would have been better adopting a neutral position.
                          
                            I also noted further statements in the report that underpinned Hammond's uncertain standpoint on what has happened in Hong Kong since last September.
                            
                              First, on the issue of "civic nomination", he said the idea was put forward by "academics and civil society representatives". It is commonly known that these people, including "pan-democratic" legislators, are not truly representative of Hong Kong people. They are simply individuals who speak for themselves.
                              
                                The foreign secretary knows very well that by their calls for "genuine universal suffrage" these "academics and civil society representatives" have hijacked the prospect of having universal suffrage in Hong Kong. He also knows universal suffrage can only be achieved within the "parameters of the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC)".
                                
                                  Instead of referring to the NPCSC decision as "restrictive" in his report, Hammond should condemn the Hong Kong Federation of Students (HKFS) and the academics for their illegal demands that the NPCSC decision be retracted. Honesty and reality checks are needed.
                                  
                                    The foreign secretary might have said the "One Country, Two Systems" policy has continued to serve Hong Kong well. He might also have stated that "there remains room for meaningful steps forward for democracy and hopes that the HKSAR government and legislators can work together to achieve a consensus acceptable to the people of Hong Kong".
                                    
                                      Will "pro-democratic" legislators, academics and "representatives" in Hong Kong take note? Or will they continue to stir up trouble?
                                      
                                        It is time they acted rationally in the best interests of everyone in Hong Kong.
                                        
                                          The author is the director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                                          
(HK Edition 03/12/2015 page10)

