
Andrew Mitchell says one of the key lessons of the recent British election which is useful to HK is that democracies by their very nature are imperfect 
An extraordinary election has just taken place in the United Kingdom. Throughout six weeks of intense campaigning David Cameron's ruling Conservative Party was neck-and-neck in the polls with Ed Miliband's Labour Party, only for the Conservatives to pull away emphatically on the day and secure an outright majority in the new parliament. 
It was a result no one had predicted, and the fallout was immediate. As Cameron started to prepare to govern for the first time without his coalition partners in the Liberal Democrats (Lib-Dems), three of his fellow party leaders - Miliband, Nick Clegg of the Lib-Dems, and Nigel Farage of the UK Independence Party (UKIP) - resigned in the wake of their various electoral losses. 
As an Englishman, perhaps I should take great pride in such an eventful election campaign. After all this was one of the most open and exciting elections of my lifetime, with the traditional two-party dominance of Conservative and Labour challenged not only by the Lib-Dems and UKIP but also by the Green Party, the Scottish National Party (SNP) and Plaid Cymru, among others. And yet I feel absolutely no pride. In fact I did not even vote. 
The reason for this is quite simple: I am a Labour voter and I hail from Sevenoaks, deep in the heart of the Conservative stronghold of Kent. Sevenoaks has been a Conservative seat ever since its creation, except for a two-year interlude in the 1920s when it was Liberal. In the 2010 election Michael Fallon, the current Defense Secretary, retained the seat he has occupied since 1997, with 57 percent of the vote. The Lib-Dems came second in the election with 21 percent of the vote, and Labour third with 13 percent. So in a first-past-the-post (FPTP) system, where only one candidate is elected in each constituency regardless of the distribution of votes, it is safe to say that my vote is effectively worthless. 
This statement is backed up by this year's election results. Once again Fallon retained his seat with 57 percent of the vote, and Labour came third with 13 percent. The only real difference was that UKIP usurped the Lib-Dems, who were relegated to fourth place - a situation that was replicated in many constituencies across the country. 
However, with no prize for second place in an FPTP system, UKIP's gains across the country did not translate into more representation in Parliament. In fact UKIP succeeded in gaining only one seat despite attracting nearly 13 percent of the overall vote. Compare this with the SNP, which secured a phenomenal 56 of the 59 seats in Scotland despite receiving less than 5 percent of the vote in the UK as a whole. In fact, even in Scotland the SNP only received about half of the overall vote. 
According to the Electoral Reform Society (ERS), this year's results are the least proportional in UK electoral history, with some 24 percent of the seats in Parliament now held by members who would not be there if a system of proportional voting were in place. The previous highest figure was 23 percent back in 1983. 
The ERS is now organizing a petition calling for "a fairer, more proportional voting system which ensures that seats in Parliament match the way people vote". "It cannot be right that it takes 26,000 voters to elect an MP from one party and almost 4 million to elect an MP from another," said Katie Ghose, chief executive of the ERS. "Millions will have woken up on Friday morning to find their voices effectively haven't been heard." 
However, with Cameron no longer in coalition with the Lib-Dems, the party which has traditionally supported proportional representation (PR) for the UK, any prospects of electoral reform in the next five years seem extremely remote. 
So what can we learn from the UK election here in Hong Kong? Well, first of all, democracy is no panacea. Even in Britain, the birthplace of parliamentary democracy, the system is far from perfect. In fact, if I compare my options for the 2015 UK election with those for the 2017 Chief Executive election under the framework provided by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC), I find myself feeling far more empowered here in Hong Kong. 
Another lesson to be learnt here is that not all democratic systems are the same. FPTP, for example, is very different to PR. So anyone in Hong Kong who feels inclined to defer to Western democracies needs to be very careful in doing so, because these democracies come in many different shapes and sizes, and each has its own strengths and weaknesses. 
It makes very little sense, then, to search for the perfect system. Democracies by their very nature are imperfect beasts - ongoing processes of ebb and flow, compromise and consensus. And an imperfect democracy is undoubtedly better than no democracy at all. The most important thing, ultimately, is to have a vote that counts. 




(HK Edition 05/20/2015 page12)

