
It is time for members of the opposition to abandon the illusion that they have any chance of forcing the central government to compromise on matters of principle, particularly when national interests are concerned. Further indulgence of such an illusion benefits neither Hong Kong society nor themselves. 
In what is seen as yet another clear gesture to reaffirm the central government's fundamental principles regarding the proposed universal suffrage for the election of the next Hong Kong SAR Chief Executive, Zhang Rongshun, vice-chairman of the Legislative Affairs Commission under the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC), on Wednesday categorically excluded the possibility of any changes to the legal framework laid down by the NPCSC on Aug 31 last year. 
After the notion of "international standards" on democratic elections failed to win over the majority of Hong Kong residents, as evidenced by overwhelming public support in recent opinion polls for implementation of universal suffrage within the legal framework, some members of the opposition are still trying to push through their demands. These include abolition of corporate votes in the Nominating Committee and introduction of a "none of the above" option in the proposed "one person, one vote" practice. 
The advocates have managed to come up with some seemingly sound reasons to justify their demands. But it is simply too obvious even for ordinary people to overlook that the underlying intention of such demands is to compromise the goal-keeping mechanism of the legal framework. This is designed to ensure only patriots have a chance to win the post of the top political leader of the SAR. 
This bottom line for ensuring patriotic leadership for the SAR will never be compromised by the central government, as has been repeatedly stated by senior officials on different occasions. This is because not only the requirement is crucial for maintaining Hong Kong's social stability and economic prosperity, it is also a matter of national security. 
For universal suffrage to be achieved and democracy to take a great step forward in the SAR, the city's on-going constitutional reform process needs to stay on track by strictly adhering to the legal framework set by the NPCSC. This requires members of the opposition to set aside their personal and party interests and to respect the wishes of most people in Hong Kong. They too will gain ultimately by facilitating "one person, one vote". 




(HK Edition 05/21/2015 page11)

