







 
District council election candidate for the Pokfulum constituency Jeremy Young Chit-on waves to dwellers in the neighborhood. Young will compete with incumbent councilor Paul Zimmerman in the election. Parker Zheng / China Daily
Jeremy Young Chit-on says he was motivated by the illegal "Occupy Central" campaign to contest in the district council election. 
Young is challenging incumbent councilor Paul Zimmerman - a Dutch-naturalized Chinese citizen - in the Pokfulum constituency of Southern District Council. 
The 39-year-old contender from the Liberal Party believes if the "silent majority" come out this time, the turnout rate will be higher and he will have a greater chance to win. 
He is the son of former tourism constituency lawmaker Howard Young How-wah and a former political assistant of the SAR government's Education Bureau. Jeremy Young likes to be hands-on, especially through meeting people. 
He is grateful to James Tien Pei-chun, the Liberal Party's honorary chairman, who has offered him encouragement and advice. His father, senior party members and former education secretary Michael Suen Ming-yeung stood with him when he met residents in the streets. 
His youngest daughter was born in September last year. He watched on TV in hospital as the illegal occupation occurred. 
"I was a bit shocked when I thought if she were born three days later, she would have been born in the street - because the roads were blocked. I understand people's quest for democracy, but that was not the way to pursue democracy," he said. 
The second thing that stimulated him to participate in the election was when Zimmerman attended the 2014 National Day reception and held up a yellow umbrella. 
"I felt very disgusted because he abused his official position to steal attention and disrespected our country," he commented. 
Zimmerman's conduct attracted wide media coverage. Some foreign media wrongly reported him as a legislator but he did not clarify. 
Because Young lives in Pokfulum and knows the area well, he can be readily available if people need assistance. He speaks fluent English, Cantonese and Mandarin, but his opponent cannot speak Chinese. Besides, he knows government operations and bureaucracies well and is backed by a political party. 
He has heard residents saying Zimmerman often "talks big" but rarely delivers. One resident who voted for Zimmerman last time said he would vote for Young this time. 
Young has been preparing for the campaign for almost a year. He says he finds the residents in this middle-class neighborhood very friendly. Some people talk politics but are rational and agree to differ. 
joseph@chinadailyhk.com 
(HK Edition 11/21/2015 page6)

