
Three years ago, in January 2012, an online video recorded how a mainland child eating on a Hong Kong MTR train triggered an argument between some local people and a group of mainlanders. Until the beginning of 2015, anti-mainland sentiment in Hong Kong had focused on mainlanders who visited the city for shopping, mothers giving birth or parallel trading. However, since February these sentiments have merged with expressions of separatism. 
Over the past three years, colonial flags have rarely been seen at anti-mainland protests. On Feb 16, 2014, about 100 Hong Kong people shouted insults at mainland visitors shopping in an upscale district of the Kowloon peninsula. It was the first time angry Hong Kong people had directly confronted visitors at a central location. However, only one colonial flag was waved during this protest. By contrast, since February anti-mainland protesters not only waved the Blue Ensign flags, but also shouted slogans demanding independence for Hong Kong. 
Following last year's 79-day "Occupy Central" movement separatism and calls for independence have been increasing in Hong Kong. Some university students argue that Hong Kong people and mainlanders are ethnically different. Recent anti-mainland protests have been used as a way to promote independence. These incidents have also coincided with hostile behavior toward mainland students in local universities. Recent activism organized and supported by the opposition has started to develop into an anti-mainland movement. 
Hostility towards students from the mainland is not new, but is rapidly spreading at Hong Kong universities, where mainland students comprise over 11 percent of the total student population. Recently, a mainland student Ye Lushan, who tried to run for a position at the University of Hong Kong (HKU) Students' Union, was treated badly after a video claimed she was a former member of the Communist Youth League. Ye and her supporters (students run as groups for the election) were trounced in the election simply because she was portrayed as an agent of Beijing. In such a tense political atmosphere, the "Democracy Wall" in the HKU displayed a slogan: "To brainwashed Commie-loving mainlanders, we despise you!" 
Chief Executive Leung Chung-ying is well aware of these deteriorating attitudes in Hong Kong. In his new Policy Address, he made a timely criticism of the official magazine of the HKU Students' Union which had advocated "Hong Kong independence". He asked people to be vigilant about such a movement. 
It is also worth noting that mainland tourist numbers in Hong Kong during the first five days of the Lunar New Year public holiday declined for the first time in nearly 20 years. Immigration Department figures showed that 675,155 mainlanders entered Hong Kong during the five days from Feb 18 to 22, down 0.16 per cent on last year's figures. By contrast, the 676,297 mainlanders who visited Hong Kong in the same period last year represented a 13.7 percent jump from 594,302 in 2013. These figures are worrying industry leaders in the retail and tourism industries, who blame the decline in visitor numbers on recent protests against mainland visitors. However, the government seems more concerned about the political implications of this rather than economic consequences. 
It is ridiculous that Hong Kong, as a part of China, is trying to push mainlanders out while many other countries are trying to attract more mainland tourists. The authorities should realize that the latest anti-mainland protests concentrating in towns in New Territories have been violent. The protesters have not only clashed with mainlanders, but disrupted shops and businesses. Police had to use pepper spray and arrested over a dozen protesters. 
The anti-mainland sentiment in Hong Kong has sparked a backlash from mainlanders. Reuters reported one HKU student from the mainland saying: "Mainland students hate local students as well because we receive hatred from them". Negative online comments from mainland netizens against Hong Kong have increased since Chinese New Year. 
On Feb 6, the Global Times ran an op-ed warning that "McCarthyism" was infiltrating Hong Kong's universities following the HKU Students' Union election. 
On Feb 26, the People's Daily and the Global Times both published opinion pieces disagreeing with the idea of reducing mainland visitor numbers under the IVS. The IVS has contributed much to Hong Kong's progress and prosperity. The scheme should instead be improved with a number of new policies, rather than merely reducing the number of visitors. The IVS is not only important for tourism, but for many other reasons. A further deterioration in the relationship between Hong Kong and mainland will seriously damage the city in many ways. 




(HK Edition 03/04/2015 page10)

