
The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences on Wednesday published its 2015 edition of the "blue paper" on the state of the rule of law in the country in the past year. The annual report, presented by the nation's top policy think tank, concluded that the illegal "Occupy Central" movement "seriously eroded" the rule of law in the Hong Kong SAR last year. 
This is further confirmation of what the majority of Hong Kong residents saw first hand last fall. And there is abundant evidence that such assaults on the rule of law in the SAR have been continuing in different ways. This includes the wanton harassment of shoppers during the holiday season and recent attacks on tourists from the mainland and some local residents by anti-parallel trading "protesters". The actions of the demonstrators are increasingly reminding people of lynch mobs. 
The SAR government ended the illegal campaign peacefully after 79 days of the infringement of the rights of local residents. But the damage had already been done - and in more ways than many realize. The fact that local businesses and consumers are being illegally harassed is further proof that such assaults on the rule of law are far from over. 
It is interesting to note that most participants in these illegal acts are youths misled by the "Occupy" initiators and organizers. Everyone who loves Hong Kong should be worried about its future for this reason alone. 
To deceive as many people and especially local youths as possible, the masterminds of the illegal campaign expressed many falsehoods about things from "genuine universal suffrage" and "civil disobedience" to the "One Country, Two Systems" policy and the Basic Law. By openly trying to compromise Hong Kong's rule of law, they showed they couldn't care less about democracy. 
The opposition members in the Legislative Council (LegCo) have vowed to veto the SAR government's constitutional reform plans if it is formulated according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC). They are once again demonstrating their disregard for the overall interests of Hong Kong. This is despite overwhelming public support for the implementation of universal suffrage within the established legal framework. 
Perhaps this desperate behavior indicates they still hope to force the central government to take a step back from the Aug 31 decision of the NPCSC. But there is no question they are now hoping to win the 2016 LegCo elections. This is despite wrecking Hong Kong people's dreams of achieving universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive election. There are enough reasons to believe they will cause even more damage to society and particularly the rule of law. Hong Kong people must not allow them to succeed. 




(HK Edition 03/19/2015 page10)

