
Louis Shih Tai-cho, president of the Hong Kong Medical Association, has called on the opposition to consider citizens' interests rather than their own personal advantages ahead of the Legislative Council's vote on the electoral reform package this week. 
Shih said he hoped opposition lawmakers would vote yes for the reform plan, which will be a big victory for the city because the 5 million eligible voters can choose the Chief Executive by "one person, one vote" in 2017. It'll also be a step closer to the opposition's pursuit of democracy. 
Speaking to China Daily in an exclusive interview, Shih expressed disappointment and said there would be no winners if the opposition vetoes the reform package. 
He disagreed that half of the people are happy and the other half are unhappy with the reform plan as some polls have suggested. All citizens will be unhappy if the reform plan is not passed because Hong Kong cannot move forward toward democracy, he said. People who oppose the package should feel unhappy too because they say they pursue democracy. 



Shih said the opposition camp has been manipulated by the radical factions and have used the wrong tactics from the start. 
They were not only wrong trying to coerce the central government with the unlawful "Occupy Central" movement, but also failed to explore room for discussion within the constitutional framework that the National People's Congress Standing Committee handed down on Aug 31 last year. 
Had the opposition resorted to dialogue, they could have come up with a more acceptable reform proposal to both sides, Shih said. Now, they find themselves cornered in a blind alley and have no way out. 
"It was wrong to seek to overturn the Aug 31 framework," Shih said. "For the sake of their belief, some people attempted even though they knew it was impossible. This made Beijing worry, react strongly and raise universal suffrage to national security level," he said. 
Shih lamented that young people today are very different from those of his generation. 
"We, having experienced the colonial days, Basic Law drafting era and the 1997 handover, understand the chance to move a step forward is not easy to come by and are more willing to compromise. But today, young people are very egocentric and lack understanding of the Basic Law," he said, targeting particularly the radical activists who proclaim independence and wave colonial flags. 
Shih feels that many young people, including young professionals like doctors and accountants, are very idealistic and unrealistic, as they pursue electoral models in foreign countries and call them "genuine universal suffrage". 
"They are politically unrealistic because that will not happen in Hong Kong, which is a special administrative region, not a sovereign state. They are also too idealistic, lacking a good understanding of the Basic Law," he says. 
joseph@chinadailyhk.com 
(HK Edition 06/15/2015 page4)

