






Protesters react while watching the live broadcast of the meeting between Taiwan's Education Minister Wu Se-hwa and student representatives during a protest in front of the Ministry of Education in Taipei, Taiwan, August 3, 2015. Hundreds of Taiwan students stormed the ministry of education compound on last Friday, after one committed suicide earlier in the week, intensifying anti-China protests over textbooks they say are aimed at promoting Beijing's "one China" policy. [Photo/Agencies]
Student activists in Taiwan continue to campaign against a proposed adjustment to the high school curriculum guidelines. The adjustment, which was floated last January, is intended to correct some misreadings of Taiwan's history. However, it has led to open protests by the opposition Democratic Progressive Party, some extreme organizations and high school students. Comments:
Believers in a "Taiwanese self-identity" still reckon that traditional Chinese culture has to be eradicated to strengthen their own beliefs. Such a fragile sense of identify seems to echo the "total Westernization" mentality of Taiwan's modern history, and lacks depth in terms of promoting local culture and traditional values. What Taiwan should do is try to reach a consensus on its identity in open discussions, which will lay the foundation for democracy and the rule of law.



China Times newspaper in Taiwan, Aug 3
In fact, it is political separatists who are exploiting the teenagers to instigate tensions. Admittedly, Taiwan's students are allowed to express their concerns over certain social issues, but they should know more about why they are protesting and what they are protesting about, rather than just mouthing some controversial campaign slogans. Very few of the students will be able to become politicians thanks to their hysterical performance, and the majority of them will end up being victims of the success of a few.
haiwainet.cn, July 28
The dispute over Taiwan's high school curriculum guidelines are, in essence, a clash between the island's unification with the mainland and "independence". Taking advantage of the student protesters' push for "cultural independence", the DPP made a rather mean move that should be condemned this time.
Ta Kung Pao newspaper in Hong Kong, July 25
What happened to the young protesters in Taiwan should serve as a wake-up call to all that ideological chaos and misreadings of history can cause serious damage to a society. Further development of both Taiwan and the mainland may be the fundamental cure for such an "unsolvable" problem on the island.
Global Times, Aug 3