


      Arguably the most significant development revealed by the district council (DC) elections is the far greater interest shown by the young, not only as voters but also as candidates. This might be interpreted as illustrating a major mood swing among the disgruntled majority in this large but not necessarily influential group. Having failed to achieve their ambitions in a rolling campaign of protests and disturbances across Hong Kong over the past few years, it is to be hoped they now accept that the proper way to achieve recognition is by voting.
      
        For the government one of the most satisfactory aspects of the poll was the record number of voters it attracted - 1.47 million people cast their votes, an increase of 265,000 compared with the previous election in 2011. This confirmed that more Hong Kong residents are finally taking an active interest in local affairs.
        
          The late Harvard University political scientist Samuel Huntington said that political institutions can best be used to channel the electoral participation of citizens. Therefore, the 2015 DC election can be hailed as a milestone for re-channelling citizen participation from the streets back to their willingness to exercise their right to vote. The unprecedented 47 percent voter turnout is a tribute to Hong Kong's current political arrangements. It offers a welcome outlet for the "young rebels" to vent their dissenting views.
          
            However, because of their track record of disruption, to nobody's surprise some "pan-democrat" candidates, notably Albert Ho Chun-yan and Frederick Fung Kin-kee lost their long-held seats, while legislator Kenneth Chan Ka-lok did not win too. Ho was thrown out of the Tuen Mun seat he had held for four terms, while Fung lost his Sham Shui Po seat to Chan Wing-yan, a young unionist. Fung has acknowledged that the result likely reflected voters' desire to see a younger candidate reflecting fresh ideas. Both Ho and Fung were veteran politicians at the grassroots level. Their failure to retain their seats illustrates a certain degree of public dissatisfaction with their political ideology and work. Kenneth Chan, however, parachuted into a new constituency without previous district experiences and his defeat was actually expected.
            
              On the other hand, a number of "umbrella" activists performed impressively and a few were elected, thus signalling a genuine generational change in Hong Kong's political development. "Youthspiration", the oddly named offspring of last year's disruptive "umbrella movement" that caused so much chaos on the streets and economic loss, fielded candidates for nine different seats but secured just one. Their winner was a young woman, Kwong Po-yin, who defeated sitting member Lau Wai-wing in the Kowloon City DC and looks set to spice up that body's future proceedings. An unexpected young "outsider" who claimed a seat on the Eastern DC is the independent Chui Chi-kin, who filed his nomination as a candidate on the very last day but somehow managed to outshine sitting member Chris Chung Shu-kun of the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong (DAB), who is also a member of the Legislative Council.
              
                For the pro-establishment camp, a number of veteran legislators, such as Chris Chung and Elizabeth Quat, were defeated. This showed the imperative of candidates making genuine contributions to their constituents if they expect to be elected.
                
                  An interesting aspect of the vote was the unpredictable results in many constituencies clearly affected by the dynamics of the new and old voters' orientations. It also debunks the myth that whenever the voter turnout is high, the result must favor a particular camp, whether it is "pan-democrat" or pro-establishment. The reality is that one must analyze each constituency on the basis of not only the candidates' work but their demographic characteristics plus opposing camps' mobilization of citizens and supporters to vote. The poll also demonstrated the strong appeal of the DAB, which grabbed 117 directly elected seats. It also recorded a strong showing by the Neo Democrats, with 15 of its 16 candidates directly elected.
                  
                    While political parties remained quite weak overall in nominating far fewer candidates than the total number of directly elected seats, they did play a crucial role in mobilizing voters to cast their ballots, urged on by supporters and helpers shouting slogans and generating a genuine atmosphere of electoral fever.
                    
                      A minority of candidates resorted to negative campaigning on the election day. They distributed leaflets alleging wrongdoing and scandals among their opponents. Apart from this, candidates by and large maintained a polite attitude to one another. All this suggests that Hong Kong's political development is by no means as backward as many people have suggested.
                      
                        If citizen participation is an indicator of democratization, the relatively higher turnout represents a progressive move toward democratic change, even though "pan-democrat" lawmakers in June voted down a constitutional reform bill for the 2017 Chief Executive election. Hence, amid the confrontational politics of Hong Kong, we can see a silver lining: Hong Kong people have proven their maturity to practice democracy in the real sense of the word.
                        
                          The author is a professor and head of the Department of Social Sciences at the Hong Kong Institute of Education and a long-time observer of developments in Hong Kong.
                          
(HK Edition 11/24/2015 page4)

