
This constitutional reform thing bores us all. Luckily, it has finally ended. 
The last couple of weeks had been rather hectic and amusing. Radical "localist" groups incited supporters to protest at the funeral of "Beijing loyalist" Yeung Kwong - one of the leaders of the anti-British riots in 1967. Senior Hong Kong leaders and mainland officials attended Yeung's funeral. 
Ray Wong, from "localist" group HK Indigenous, argued that the government should not commend a "riot leader" who had caused "many casualties", as he told Ming Pao. However, he later mysteriously apologized to Yeung's family for his group's actions at the funeral. 
Marx taught us that history repeats itself, "first as a tragedy, then as a farce". 
Around the same time when "localists" opened bottles of champagne and displayed "pineapples" - street slang for homemade explosives - to mock Yeung's funeral procession, police arrested 10 people after discovering powerful explosives in an alleged plot to cause mayhem and bloodshed during last week's Legislative Council debate on electoral reform. 
The suspects are believed to be core members of radical group calling itself the "National Independent Party", which was reportedly formed in January. "Bomb and kill you all ... Long live democracy," one of the suspects reportedly told investigators after the arrests. 
As a result, our LegCo went on amber alert as if not enough alerts have been issued amid the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome scare. "The latest risk assessment by the police indicated there's a likelihood of the LegCo Complex being stormed by radical activists in the next couple of days," LegCo President Jasper Tsang Yok-sing said. 
Really? So what was the risk assessment again during the "Occupy Central" movement" when radicals called for a "revolution" while they bathed inside the LegCo? 
All these led to an epic anti-climax. Shortly after the voting bell sounded on that fateful day, all but a handful of pro-establishment lawmakers suddenly got up and walked out of the chamber. Those who stayed constituted a quorum and they cast their votes - 8 yea, 28 nay, 1 blank vote and 33 absent. Most of the absentees were pro-establishment lawmakers who had left the room before the vote was taken. 
As that was too bizarre, the radicals seemed to have been distracted and forgot to storm the LegCo and cause mayhem. 
All these inexplicable events have led us officially into the post-reform era, where we are supposed to forget about politics for the time being and focus on "livelihood issues" or the city's "competitiveness". Fair enough, but I suspect that the new era will still be hugely political. 
According to a public opinion poll by Our Hong Kong Foundation, politics only comes fifth in a list of people's priorities - after housing, economic development, employment and healthcare. Some, therefore, claim that it makes more sense for Hong Kong to focus on improving people's livelihoods regardless of what happens to constitutional reform. 
What they do not realize is that the housing issue has its own politics, and the same is true also for economic development, employment and healthcare. Politics does not exist in a vacuum. Lay people may say they do not care about politics, but when they assert their housing rights, that is also politics. 
In the past year, our society focused single-mindedly on democratic reform. Many supported the government's reform package not because they love democracy, but because they believe this can end all our society's disagreements once and for all. 
While we can put the blame squarely on the dissidents for the failure of constitutional reform, the fact remains that the pro-establishment camp is also not functioning well. 
After the vote, what we need is new politics with a positive vibe. In order to achieve this, we need to inject new blood into the existing political ecosystem. We need new faces to carry the new political message, and they should not be selected from our old definition of the "elite" - foreign-educated, second or third-generation tycoons or professionals. 
People ask why Hong Kong has ceased to be innovative and entrepreneurial. They forget that innovation comes often from the grassroots and small and medium-sized enterprises, and not from the huge-but-slow conglomerates. 




(HK Edition 06/23/2015 page9)

