
Problems faced by the opposition camp - such as inability to control radicals and a lack of vision and effective leadership - have become a major obstacle for Hong Kong to achieve electoral reform, veteran lawmaker Tam Yiu-chung said. 
Members of the Legislative Council will decide in a week whether the electorate can vote in a universal suffrage election to select the next Chief Executive in 2017. The prospects of this happening have never been good, owing to the bundle strategy adopted by the opposition. 
The opposition, controlling 27 seats, holds the veto power because the reform package requires a two-thirds majority to pass. Tam, one of the 59 Basic Law drafters, said the high threshold was intended to ensure the minority would have an influence on the design of elections. 
But he said the opposition camp had marginalized themselves. Their stance now represented the views of the most radical elements of the camp. 
Speaking on a radio program on Thursday, Tam said newcomers in the opposition were preoccupied with their own electoral advantages. The more experienced members reluctantly followed them. This trend is also concerning central government authorities. 
Tik Chi-yuen, a former lawmaker and still a member of the Democratic Party, shares Tam's concerns. Tik criticized the opposition's strategy over the past two years. Tik said it had failed as they were unable to bring the different sides closer to an agreement. "And who's paying for this? The people," he said. 
The Democratic Party played a critical role in the passage of the 2010 electoral reforms. But because unionist Szeto Wah died in 2011, Tik said Hong Kong's most established opposition party had suffered a breakdown in leadership. The whole camp has lost its vision and direction. 
Tam had worked with Szeto in the 1980s at an official panel of employers and unions. He still remembered vividly how Szeto pushed progress bit by bit during negotiations without giving up. "He had a verse: 'Small wins add up to big victories'," he said. 
Lawmaker Ronny Tong Ka-wah's new think tank Path of Democracy has been seen by many as an attempt to break the dominance of radicals in the opposition camp. Tam has high hopes for this, saying it will help encourage a more rational debate on social issues in future. 
Should moderates in the opposition camp manage to establish regular contact with the central government, Tam said opposition politicians could pass on the views of their supporters directly to policymakers in Beijing. 
But Executive Councilor Cheng Yiu-tong, also deputy with the National People's Congress, said Ronny Tong must first vote for the reform package. Only then will Tong get recognition of his think tank from the central government. 
Cheng said that over private conversations with members in the opposition camp, he has noticed a sense of frustration and disappointment. He said these people had called themselves advocates for democracy for three decades, but they were now delaying democratic progress through their own actions. 
But he also had some sympathy for more moderate members of the opposition. Cheng said the moderates have been taken hostage by those determined to "say no" to the central government. 
kahon@chinadailyhk.com 








 
Residents wave banners condemning the opposition during a rally in support of the electoral reform package outside the Central Government Offices on Thursday. Parker Zheng / China Daily 
(HK Edition 06/12/2015 page4)

