


      Moderate opposition lawmakers should muster the courage to vote for the constitutional reform package, according to Ko Po-ling, vice-chairman of Yau Tsim Mong District Council.
      
        Ko was a member of the Election Committee that selected the first Chief Executive of the HKSAR.
        
          In an exclusive interview with China Daily, Ko said constitutional reform was at a crossroads. The opposition should respect public opinion and allow the reform package to pass. Only this way can democratic development move forward in Hong Kong.
          
            She also asks the opposition not to expect the central government to make last-minute concessions as it did in 2010. As far as she is aware, the central government has done what it can to propose a fair electoral package.
            
              "The moderates should be brave enough to separate themselves from the radicals and vote for electoral reform," she said.
              
                "I noticed that when Chief Secretary for Administration Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor announced the reform package in the Legislative Council, not all 27 opposition lawmakers walked out from the meeting - showing there is room for rational people to turn around."
                
                  In her opinion, the proposal for the 2017 CE election is the best possible model within the constitutional framework set out by the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) on Aug 31 last year.
                  
                    The NPCSC took into account views from all sections of society. This included those of the opposition camp and those with moderate and conservative views.
                    
                      Ko, a former NPC deputy, said: "The package is a workable one that balances the interests of different sectors and takes democracy forward. Many people I know agree this is an acceptable package."
                      
                        The proposal stipulated at least two CE election candidates, meaning there would be competition. Hong Kong citizens would have choices and no one would get elected without a contest. Besides, the election would be decided by "one person, one vote". The one who secured a simple majority of votes would win. This system has been used for decades and is a system Hong Kong people are familiar with, she said.
                        
                          "I think the large majority of Hong Kong people are rational and prefer to advance instead of walking into blind alleys. The opposition political parties should place the overall interests of Hong Kong above their own interests.
                          
                            "In elections, people talk about the right to nominate and the right to vote. If we now implement the voting right, we can implement the right to nominate in future," she said.
                            
                              Ko was acting as a judge for a model student competition and was talking to three Fifth Form participants. One supported the electoral reform through gradual process. Another was supportive of "civic nomination" but found the electoral package acceptable.
                              
                                The findings of the ongoing polls being run by the universities have indicated increasing numbers of people are against the political reforms. But Ko said different polls produced different results, depending on how the questions were asked.
                                
                                  If electoral reforms were allowed to progress, Hong Kong would move forward in political and economic stability, she said. If it failed, political disputes would persist and economic development would slow. Then, Hong Kong will lag behind major competitors such as Singapore and South Korea.
                                  
                                    joseph@chinadailyhk.com
                                    (HK Edition 05/18/2015 page4)

