



The Department of Justice announced on Thursday that it will press charges against 22 of 31 people arrested during operations to clear the Mong Kok occupation site last year. They are being arrested on charges of contempt of court and obstruction of police duties. The 22 include leading figures from the illegal "Occupy Central" campaign such as Hong Kong Federation of Students' deputy secretary-general Lester Shum, Scholarism Convener Joshua Wong and Wong Ho-ming, a leading member of the League of Social Democrats. The other nine individuals have been released unconditionally. 
As expected, the opposition camp immediately cried foul over these judicial moves by labeling them "political persecution" - an unjustifiable accusation they always use in such circumstances. Their logic is simple: They can do anything they want in the name of "true democracy" or "genuine universal suffrage". This is tantamount to declaring they are above the law if they have a political excuse. 
Hong Kong is a civilized society protected by the rule of law - one of our most important core values. It is also a crucial part of the city's success as an international financial center and free market. 
That is why local residents in general expect offenders to be brought to justice regardless of their motives and excuses. Therefore, the opposition's wanton accusation of "political persecution" is a blatant insult to local residents' wisdom and public responsibility. It also poses a serious threat to the stability and prosperity of society. 
It should be noted that Hong Kong is not alone in maintaining the rule of law so rigorously. All Western democracies have been doing or trying to do the same for much longer than Hong Kong. Political motives must never be used as an excuse for being above the law. In this sense, people have good reason to applaud the prosecution of these 22 people and condemn their unlawful behavior. 
It has long been accepted that democracy cannot exist without the rule of law. Therefore, any attempt to justify illegal behavior in the name of democracy can only be seen as a conspiracy to jeopardize the rule of law at the expense of true democracy. 

(HK Edition 01/09/2015 page1)

