
Wang Shengwei argues that if the 'pan-democrats' succeed in vetoing the reforms they will deprive Hong Kong people of the fundamental right to democratize their city 
The "Occupy Central" protests have caused unprecedented dissension in our city. Yet, the protesters repeat their slogans of "public nomination" and "genuine universal suffrage", and demand retraction of the proposed electoral reform framework. 
When the Hong Kong government recently tabled its electoral reform plans to the Legislative Council (LegCo) for election of the Chief Executive (CE), former chief secretary Anson Chan immediately attacked the plan. She said it would make the 2017 poll for CE a "fake election" and all 27 pan-democratic lawmakers were set to veto these amendments. 
However, the latest poll commissioned by Now TV (conducted by three Hong Kong institutions) found that more people supported the government proposal than opposed it (47 versus 38 percent). The result was similar to other recent polls commissioned by TVB, Cable TV and Lingnan University. These found that 50.9, 49 and 51 percent, respectively, wanted LegCo to pass the blueprint, while according to a Hong Kong Research Association (HKRA) poll 69 percent thought that the plan "increased" the degree of democracy from the election scheme of 2012. A closer look at it will tell us why. 
The plan stipulates that the Nomination Committee (NC) consists of 1,200 members from four sectors, identical in structure to the Election Committee (EC) that selected the CE in 2012. 
In step one of the primary selection, to encourage participation of all parties, the plan requires a contender to obtain a low threshold of 120 NC members' nominations to enter the race, while a cap of 240 is set to remove the possibility of monopoly by major parties. Each NC member can choose only one contender. This process will produce five to 10 contenders, who will have to actively promote their platforms. The HKRA poll found 69 percent of Hong Kong people accepted step one, while only 25 percent objected to it. 
In step two of the primary selection, each NC member will cast votes of confidence via individual secret ballot for at least two contenders. Only the top two to three contenders receiving at least 50 percent of the votes will become CE candidates for the election. The HKRA poll found 61 percent of Hong Kong people accepted step two, while only 33 percent objected to it. 
Clearly, the HKRA poll found that the majority of Hong Kong people accepted the 1,200-strong NC to choose the SAR's 2017 CE candidates for the 3.5 million Hong Kong registered voters. 
By comparison, in the 2008 US presidential election, 4,233 Democratic Party delegates cast votes in the 2008 Democratic Party Primary election on behalf of the 43.1 million registered party voters to choose the Democratic nominee. If we scale down these registered party voters to 3.5 million (the Hong Kong number), then the party delegates should also be reduced proportionally to 341. Then it becomes clear the 341 Democratic Party delegates are not as numerous. They are thus less broadly representative than the 1,200-strong NC. 
In the general election, every registered Hong Kong voter has the right to vote for one of the two to three CE candidates. The candidate who receives the most votes will be the winner. Again, the HKRA poll found that 62 percent of Hong Kong people accepted this plan, while only 29 percent objected to it. 
In the US, the winner of the presidential election is determined by an "indirect vote", in which voters cast ballots for members of the US Electoral College on a state-by-state basis. 
As Chief Secretary Carrie Lam stressed, "The whole electoral process will become more inclusive, transparent and competitive. And the CE will have a greater mandate and accountability to the whole Hong Kong population than ever before". 
Is it then fair to label the proposed 2017 CE election as a "fake election"? 
After all, the "pan-democrats" have demanded "public nomination", which is in fact unconstitutional. Article 45 of the Basic Law says the CE should be selected "by universal suffrage upon nomination by a broadly representative Nominating Committee in accordance with democratic procedures". Unless Article 45 is amended by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, "public nomination" is out of the question at present. 
If "pan-democratic" lawmakers succeed in vetoing the plan, the 2017 CE will be elected by the current 1,200-strong EC. Then Hong Kong people will be deprived of the right to participate in the election. This will seriously damage any meaningful say they could have under the proposal, including that of the "pan-democrats". But some "pan-democratic" lawmakers have been fantasizing that their veto will bring about a restart of the reform process in 2017. 
A Beijing official recently told a Hong Kong barrister delegation that the proposed blueprint must be put into practice before a decision is made on whether it should be amended in future. This is entirely consistent with Article 45. It states that the method for selecting the CE will be "in accordance with the principle of gradual and orderly progress". 
"To veto" or "not to veto" may be a hard decision for some "pan-democratic" lawmakers. They probably can use some guidance from an ancient Chinese saying: "Those who suit their actions to the times are wise." 




(China Daily 05/13/2015 page12)

