
Feng Wei, deputy director of the State Council's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office (HKMAO), met with five leading members of the Democratic Party (DP) led by Chairwoman Emily Lau Wai-hing over lunch on Aug 26. Some people here have interpreted the meeting as part of the central government's efforts to turn some "pan-democrat" figures into "loyal opposition" personalities. 
"Loyal opposition" is a concept born of Western politics that does not necessarily refer to a particular party but rather any or every political party. It means all parties regardless of their differences with the ruling party or vice versa must remain loyal to the state. It also means all non-ruling parties should be a "loyal opposition". Remember that betraying the state is not tolerated in Western politics. 
The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) is an administrative region of the People's Republic of China that enjoys unparalleled autonomy. Born in an unusual era of modern history, Hong Kong politics bears the characteristics of confrontational politics. These confrontations are always between the pro-establishment and the opposition camps. And because of this, Hong Kong's constitutional development has been anything but smooth. So much so that the SAR government's electoral reform package was blocked before it could implement universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive election. 
Once universal suffrage is established in the HKSAR's CE and Legislative Council (LegCo) elections, all political groups (parties) in the city will compete with one another in democratic elections and must be loyal to the State. That means the SAR must forego confrontational politics if it wants to achieve universal suffrage. 
HKMAO Director Wang Guangya said at a meeting with LegCo members from Hong Kong in Shenzhen on May 31, "There are two types of 'pan-democrats' (in Hong Kong): One consists of a very small number of people with ulterior motives who use democracy as a disguise to hide their intention to present Hong Kong as an independent political entity... who doggedly oppose the overall jurisdiction of the central government over Hong Kong..." 
Wang said the other includes the great majority of "pan-democrat" friends. "They generally care about the country's development as well as Hong Kong's future." 
They also support the resumption of China's sovereign rule over Hong Kong. "They have embraced the 'One Country, Two Systems' principle and the country's social system as enshrined in the nation's Constitution," he explained. 
"Some of them may disagree with the central government on certain political issues but not the Constitution, the Basic Law or the country's social system. 
"I hope to communicate with those 'pan-democrat' friends as often as possible and exchange views on any issue of common concern on the basis of shared political values," Wang added. 
Soon after Feng's meeting with DP leaders in Hong Kong, Ronny Tong Ka-wah, convener of a political group and think tank called the Path of Democracy, was invited to observe the Victory Day military parade in Beijing on Sept 3. 
He met with Feng the next morning and had dinner with Wang in the evening. He said afterward that the two central government officials left him the impression that Beijing is willing to exchange views with "pan-democrats" and be more tolerant to "moderate pan-democrats". 
However, it should be noted that the main difference between "moderate democrats" and "radical opposition" is the strategies they maintain toward the central government rather than their fundamental standing. That is why they all voted against the SAR government's constitutional reform bill, which would have implemented universal suffrage in the 2017 CE election. 
On Aug 31, Chan Ka-lok, a leading member of the Civic Party, published an article in Ming Pao. In this commentary Chan said, "'Loyal opposition' will exist only when the people decide who runs the government" 
It is not surprising that exponents of diehard radical opposition like Chan define "loyal opposition" this way. "Moderate pan-democrats" must make it public that they acknowledge the constitutional authority of the central government. It is the first step toward becoming "loyal opposition" in Hong Kong. 
Some people here have attempted to change "loyal to the State" to "loyal to Hong Kong". That is absolutely unacceptable because the "One Country, Two Systems" principle requires commitment to protecting the sovereignty, security and development of the nation. Hong Kong's long-term prosperity and stability depends on the nation maintaining its sovereignty, security and development interests. 




(HK Edition 09/09/2015 page8)

