







 
Students from Confucius institutes in Kenya perform a dance of China's Uygur ethnic group at the Mombasa-Nairobi Standard Gauge Railway's Section No 9 in Kenya on Aug 24. It is part of performances for the railway line builders by the Chinese language and culture institutes in Kenya. The events were launched by the Chinese embassy and co-organized by China Road and Bridge Corp - which is building Kenya's largest infrastructure project in recent times - the institutes and China Central Television. Xu Jia / China Daily
S. Africa sends most students to China 
South African has dispatched 54 scholarship students to China, the largest contingent ever sent by the country. 
"To the students, there is nothing quite like being on your own in a foreign country. This experience might really bring out your independent nature and teach you to be self-reliant," Mduduzi Manana, the deputy minister of higher education and training, said at a ceremony in Pretoria on Aug 24. His department received over 180 applications from students. 
"You will experience different styles of education and have access to expertise that is not always available in South Africa," he said, adding that South Africa and China are reaping the benefits of their strategic partnership. 
China, Ghana mark 55 years of ties 
Chinese and Ghanaians competed in basketball and ping-pong tournaments recently as part of a sporting event to mark 55 years of diplomatic relations between the countries. 
The event, held in Accra, was organized by the Ghana-China Friendship Association and was watched by Sun Baohong, the Chinese ambassador to Ghana, as well as Ghanaian Sports Minister Mustapha Ahmed and Minister of Health Alex Segbefia. 
Ghana is one of the first sub-Saharan countries to establish diplomatic relations with China. Sun urged both sides to make efforts to expand cultural exchanges and cultivate people-to-people friendship. 
Papua New Guinea memorial for martyrs 
A Chinese government delegation held a memorial ceremony on Aug 24 for Chinese martyrs of the War of Resistance against Japanese Aggression (1937-1945) in Kokopo, in Papua New Guinea. 
The Japanese imprisoned about 1,600 Chinese soldiers on the South Pacific island nation during World War II. More than 650 died in prison camps, while nearly 1,000 were liberated and repatriated by the US navy in 1946. 
At the ceremony held at a cemetery in Kokopo, Gu Chaoxi, China's vice-minister of civil affairs, said the war launched by Japanese militarists had brought trauma to the countries that were invaded, causing endless suffering to people who love peace and amity. 
Morocco set for Beijing book fair debut 
Morocco's ministry of culture said the country this year made its debut at the Beijing International Book Fair, Aug 26 to 30. 
This move came as a result of new impetus in the relationship between the ministry and Moroccan publishers, it said. 
According to the fair organizer, this year's event will see 2,270 publishers from 82 countries and regions participate in the fair. This year, 270,000 publications will be on display over 66,000 square meters at the China International Exhibition Center. 
Senior CPC and DRC officials meet in Beijing 
Zhao Leji, a senior official in the Communist Party of China, met with a delegation from the ruling party of the Democratic Republic of Congo in Beijing on Aug 25. 
Zhao, a member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee and head of the CPC Central Committee Organization Department, said China has always attached great importance to its friendly ties with the DRC. 
He called on the CPC and the People's Party for Reconstruction and Democracy of the DRC to further exchange experiences in political governance to boost the development of relations. 
Mova Sakanyi, secretary-general of the ruling party, said the DRC is willing to enhance cooperation with China. 
China, Togo vow enhanced exchanges 
China's top legislator, Zhang Dejiang, met with Dama Dramani, speaker of Togo's National Assembly, on Aug 24 in Beijing. 
China-Togo relations have developed smoothly since diplomatic ties were forged 43 years ago, Zhang, chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, said. Zhang added that the NPC is willing to enhance exchanges with the National Assembly to increase mutual understanding and consolidate mutual trust. 
Dramani said the Togolese people have benefited from mutually beneficial cooperation with China, adding that the National Assembly hopes to learn from China's development experience. 

(China Daily Africa Weekly 08/28/2015 page2)

