
It is hardly surprising that numerous "pan-democrat" lawmakers lashed out at Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying on Wednesday. In calling for residents to vote radical lawmakers out of the legislature at the next election, Leung touched on a raw nerve. 
But the warning - that those lawmakers who supported the "Occupy Central" movement would face serious consequences, including "being punished" in the upcoming elections - is more than only Leung's opinion. It is a view widely expressed in the community. 
Radical legislators, who call themselves "democrats", are naturally falling out of favor with the majority of people. By scheming, instigating or participating in the 79-day illegal movement last fall, these radical legislators crushed the aura of democracy they had painstakingly built. They not only infringed the freedoms, rights and interests of others, but ripped apart Hong Kong's social fabric. They also damaged the city's reputation as a law-abiding society. What they did was undemocratic. 
By launching their subsequent "non-cooperation campaign" in the Legislative Council, employing endless filibusters to block bills at will - including those concerning livelihood issues - they have abused the mandate given to them by the people of Hong Kong. Rather than helping the executive branch of the government carry out policies to tackle the deep-seated problems plaguing Hong Kong, they are deliberately undermining public governance, and aggravating the city's social problems. 
Arguments from the radicals that filibustering tactics are also practiced in Western democracies make no sense. They can't fool people on this. The only case for legitimate use of filibustering tactics is when it is used to protect the minority from the tyranny of the majority. By indiscriminately blocking legislative bills to promote their own agendas and petty party interests, the radicals are abusing filibustering at the expense of society. 
With political wrangling now taking a heavy toll on the competitiveness and future of the SAR, Hong Kong people can no longer afford to tolerate such political radicalism. The next election for the legislature offers the city's voters the opportunity to make the right choices for the sake of the future of Hong Kong. 




(HK Edition 03/26/2015 page10)

