


      The implementation of universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive (CE) election has entered a critical stage after the second round of the public consultation over constitutional reform started on Wednesday.
      
        Universal suffrage is the goal of Hong Kong's constitutional development as set out in the Basic Law. The framework decision by the country's top legislative body on Aug 31 last year paves the way for the implementation of universal suffrage.
        
          President Xi Jinping's comments on this issue, when he met with CE Leung Chun-ying in Macao last month, provided the fundamental criteria for constitutional reform: It must be conducive to the improvement of local residents' lives; to the prosperity and stability of Hong Kong society and to the nation's sovereignty, security and development.
          
            It is fair to say that implementation of universal suffrage already has a schedule, a roadmap, a framework and a direction. Together, these constitute a solid foundation for constitutional reform in Hong Kong.
            
              Whether the implementation of universal suffrage succeeds will depend on Hong Kong residents' efforts, albeit in accordance with the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC. This is necessary to work out a detailed plan for the CE election by universal suffrage in 2017.
              
                It is our responsibility to join hands in building consensus. This can be done by sharing ideas and having rational discussion, with the aim of developing a workable CE election process in keeping with democratic principles. This means it must suit Hong Kong's actual circumstances and be acceptable to the great majority of local residents.
                
                  Hong Kong has never been closer to universal suffrage than now. Indeed, it is so close that it can almost be touched.
                  
                    If we work together in reaching consensus on how universal suffrage should be implemented in the 2017 CE election there is no doubt Hong Kong will achieve it on schedule.
                    
                      That, however, does not mean the instigators of "Occupy Central" will not again try to derail the city's lawful progression to universal suffrage. The illegal movement failed to achieve its unconstitutional goals because it ignored overwhelming public objections and resorted to violence (contrary to its own pledge not to do so) in addition to imposing minority will upon the majority of society. The occupiers put themselves above the law at the expense of the public interest. There was nothing democratic about "Occupy". There never will be as long as the instigators and participants refuse to respect the wishes of the public.
                      
                        The failure of "Occupy" shows that radicalism cannot win public support in Hong Kong. Those who use illegal or violent means will never succeed in a civilized society like Hong Kong. This is because they do not respect the rule of law. They are also prepared to sacrifice the public interest for their own personal agendas.
                        
                          Their self-indulgent campaign aims to deny the constitutional authority of the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the top legislature. They are trying to force the central government to accept their unconstitutional demand at the expense of the overall interests of Hong Kong society. By doing so they only manage to divide society and damage local residents' livelihoods while illegally blocking the path to universal suffrage.
                          
                            Their actions show they have no respect for democratic principles. They will only end up spoiling Hong Kong's hopes of achieving real democracy.
                            
                              Numerous public opinion polls have found more people in favor of implementing universal suffrage according to the Basic Law and decisions by the top legislature than those supporting the unconstitutional demands of the occupiers.
                              
                                It is only fair to say Hong Kong society has already reached consensus on the issue. Majority support for implementing universal suffrage in the 2017 CE election within the established constitutional framework was never in doubt during public debates over the issue. It became even more apparent in the last days of the "Occupy" campaign. There is no reason why we should not seize this opportunity to realize our dreams of having universal suffrage according to the roadmap provided by existing laws. It is in the best interests of Hong Kong. No one has the right to deprive local residents of their aspirations for universal suffrage.
                                
                                  In the run-up to the second round of public consultation over the constitutional reform, some people have offered ideas on the method for selecting the CE by universal suffrage in 2017 within the constitutional framework established by the Basic Law and decisions by the top legislature. Even if their proposals prove to be unrealistic their constructive attitude and respect for the rule of law deserve respect.
                                  
                                    Hong Kong has long been a culturally diverse society. Disagreements over constitutional matters are to be expected. But majority decisions should always prevail - as should the rule of law. Our constitutional development is a long process that requires united efforts by the majority of the public.
                                    
                                      The election of the CE by universal suffrage in 2017 will only be the beginning of a new chapter in embracing a democratic system best suited to our own conditions and needs.
                                      
                                        The author is a staff writer of the Hong Kong Commercial Daily. This is an abridged translation of the editorial he penned and published in the Chinese-language newspaper on Monday.
                                        
(HK Edition 01/08/2015 page1)

