








Chinese President Xi Jinping (back, 4th R), also general secretary of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military Commission, joins a panel discussion with deputies to the 12th National People's Congress (NPC) from northeast China's Jilin province during the third session of the 12th NPC, in Beijing, capital of China, March 9, 2015. [Photo/Xinhua]




Top leader Xi Jinping's strategy for governing China and charting its development is known as the "Four Comprehensives", which comprise comprehensively building an overall moderately well-off society, comprehensively deepening reform, comprehensively governing the country in accordance with the law, and comprehensively supervising the Communist Party of China. The strategy represents the basic direction of building a modern socialist society.
Comprehensively building an overall well-off society is the key goal of China's modernization process, which is aimed at solving people's livelihood problems. At the launch of reform and opening-up in 1978, Deng Xiaoping emphasized the importance of raising people's living standards.
Thanks to the reform and opening-up, China has succeeded in the primary stage of building a moderately well-off society by the beginning of this century. Now its goal is to comprehensively build an overall moderately prosperous society by 2020.
To achieve that goal, the Party and the government have to propel social and economic development in order to improve people's livelihoods. Also, China's goal makes it clear that its modernization drive is not to pursue high GDP or global hegemony. Instead, it is to improve the lives of the Chinese people, which is exactly what Xi's governing philosophy is all about.
China has reached a crucial stage in its effort to comprehensively build an overall moderately well-off society, so have its reform and opening-up. The main problem facing China at this stage is that the deep systematic obstacles hindering its development are yet to be removed. And only comprehensively deepening reform can remove these obstacles.
