
Addressing the 2015 spring reception hosted by the Liaison Office of the Central People's Government in HKSAR, Director Zhang Xiaoming gave a speech entitled "brave the winds and waves to set sail for the long voyage". 
Zhang called on all sectors of society to gain a correct understanding of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle so the relationship between the HKSAR and the central government within one country, can be properly managed. 
In other words, for "One Country, Two Systems" to be fully implemented, it is equally important for the HKSAR to enjoy the high degree of autonomy granted by the central government. But it must also uphold the ultimate jurisdiction of the central government. 
Nowadays, many in Hong Kong, for their own political convenience, focus on "Two Systems" but pay little or no attention to "One Country". However, Deng Xiaoping's grand and unprecedented arrangement has its own rules. As part of the country, Hong Kong should never stray beyond the jurisdiction of the central government. It should never disrespect Beijing's power, especially on sensitive and crucial political issues such as universal suffrage. This is certainly not an internal matter for Hong Kong to decide on its own. It is a key issue relating to the exercise of sovereignty by the State over Hong Kong. 
Due to the controversy over how to retain universal suffrage, last year Hong Kong went through the painful 79-day "Occupy Central" protests. This left deep scars in an increasingly polarized society. It will take time to heal such wounds. But it is in the best interest of Hong Kong people to realize that the SAR's electoral mechanism should be at the central government's discretion in light of the actual situation in Hong Kong. 
Moreover, we should not allow any attempt by the opposition to reject the central government's jurisdiction over Hong Kong under the pretext of a high degree of autonomy. We should never let down our guard against "Hong Kong independence" advocated by a group of radical political activists. 
Universal suffrage has been solemnly promised by Beijing and wholeheartedly embraced by the majority of Hong Kong people. Because of opposition lawmakers' "non-cooperation campaign", whether this goal can be achieved remains to be seen. But it is necessary to enhance awareness of the need to safeguard national security in our community. It is also important to prevent the opposition from playing the "democracy card" with nefarious attempts to jeopardize the national security and sovereignty. Therefore, "one person, one vote" in Hong Kong, as a great, systematic step forward, should be handled with extra care, if we are to avoid the catastrophic outcomes frequently seen elsewhere in the world. 




(HK Edition 02/05/2015 page1)

