
Improving the continent's infrastructure will solve many problems 
US President Barack Obama's historic speech at the African Union in Addis Ababa touched on issues that are vital for the continent - such as democracy, corruption, peace and security. Of course, there was no time in the past that either Obama or other Western leaders stopped reminding Africans about these issues. 
As the first African-American president, Obama is an iconic and motivational leader for politicians and youths in Africa. Inspiration is a fundamental motivating youths or politicians to have a clear vision, endurance and a sense of unity toward success and prosperity. Either the immediate or long lasting impact of his motivational remarks are valuable. 
That being a mission well accomplished, Africa needs more tangible support from Obama. The changing face of Africa is at a critical juncture that needs practical support beyond inspiration. 



After long wars, famines and violence, many of the countries in the region are striving to change the course of the history that they are globally known for. 
As African Union Commission Chairperson Nkozasana Dlamini Zuma underscored, Africa now has more countries that are exercising democracy. Africa also has most of the rapidly growing economies of the world. 
Despite such encouraging progress in the continent, which can be seen in contrast to its dark past, African countries in all corners are now at a crucial juncture that needs honest and urgent support. 
For instance, Nigeria, the most populous and fastest growing economy of the continent, needs close collaboration to halt the atrocities of Boko Haram, which otherwise are likely to spill over to neighboring countries as they have in Chad and Cameroon, and destabilize the whole region. 



Ethiopia also needs committed support and partnership in its effort to ensure regional peace and stability, especially in Somalia and South Sudan. In addition to its participation in peacekeeping contingents under the African Union and the United Nations in both countries, Ethiopia is making tremendous efforts in the region through military or political partnerships. 
The once prosperous north African nations like Egypt, Libya and Tunisia also need support in fending off security threats from extremist groups. Other countries need partnership and collaboration not only at a time of crisis but during progress. 
But along with the motivational backup that comes from such high level personalities like Obama, Africa is in need of more support for its sustainable economic development. During a press conference at the Ethiopia National Palace, Obama said: "Our cooperation should be teaching Africans how to fish rather than giving fish." 
If Africa has to become self-reliant economically, it needs support. The support the US is giving in this regard is the African Growth and Opportunity Act, which encourages African enterprises to export their produce to the US market free of quotas. 
Still, Africa fails to use this opportunity to the full extent due to its poor infrastructure that hampers industrialization. Solving its infrastructural shortcomings can in turn solve not only its economic problems, but also speed up progress in democracy, good governance and justice among other things. 
The author is deputy editor-in-chief of the Government Communication Affairs Office of Ethiopia. He is on a 10-month scholarship with the China-Africa Press Center in Beijing. The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily. 

(China Daily Africa Weekly 07/31/2015 page11)

