
Lau Nai-keung says the intention of HK2020's proposal on constitutional reform is as clear as day - the group has friends who will benefit from the arrangement. 
Amid Hong Kong's plethora of moderate pro-democracy groups is HK2020, headed by former chief secretary Anson Chan Fang On-sang, also known as "the Old Lady" or, to the younger generation, "Anson who?" Apparently, HK2020 and Chan believe they have something original to say about the city's political situation, and occasionally they want to share it with everybody. Their comments invariably don't even register. Their latest proposal, however, seeking to put all candidates recommended for nomination on the ballot paper (no matter whether or not they are nominated) reveals the dissidents' true agenda and is therefore worthy of closer scrutiny. 
Last May, the media reported Chan's fear that extremists could hijack the "Occupy Central" activities and her regrets that the consultation on political reform had become focused on the public nomination of Chief Executive (CE) election candidates, which clearly appears to be forbidden by the Basic Law. 
How insightful: "Occupy" ultimately transmogrified into something almost totally unrelated to Central. At the time her commitment to public nomination was unclear, but now it is easier to see what she is aiming at. 
The HK2020 proposal for the CE election suggests a complex nomination and election process. First, any eligible person who obtains nominations from a minimum of one-10th of all Nominating Committee (NC) members should be "recommended" for nomination by the full NC. At the same time, HK2020 suggests a 20 percent cap on the number of votes for recommended candidates. Incorporating these two provisions in the nomination mechanism would return 5 to 10 "recommended candidates". 



In its proposal, HK2020 is unclear about the process by which the nominations would be secured, i.e. how two or three individuals from the "recommended candidates" could become the actual "nominated candidates". But perhaps that is irrelevant for HK2020. What is relevant to Chan and her colleagues, and this is where the plan is unique, is that all "recommended candidates" would be included on the ballot paper, along with those formally nominated by the NC. 
The question will naturally be asked: If there are candidates on the ballot paper who weren't nominated by the NC, then why have a nomination process? 
According to the HK2020 plan, being a "nominated candidate" affords those candidates who secure over 50 percent of all valid votes, "eligibility for outright election during the first round of the election". 
More importantly, HK2020's latest proposal also suggests that "in the event that no candidate secured the required 50 percent of total votes cast in the first round, there would be a second round run-off between those on the ballot paper who secured the highest and second-highest number of votes, regardless of whether or not they had been formally nominated." 
HK2020's proposal is clever, but will receive no backing. Chan and her colleagues have proven that the fixation on "public nomination" is unwarranted. What they suggest, is a quasi-public nomination embedded in the NC itself. However, while quasi-public nomination may satisfy quasi-dissidents, it would not satisfy true dissidents. 
One may not agree with the dissidents' call for public nomination, but their aims are at least clear. Those in HK2020 are entirely different. They would like us to somehow believe that if the NC merely returned two or three candidates for whom we could vote, we would not have "real choices"; however, if the same NC produced a wider choice in the form of "recommended candidates", the whole thing would suddenly become genuine and legitimate. 
The real intention of the proposal is as clear as day: HK2020 has friends who would benefit from this arrangement. These people couldn't possibly make it to the top two or three in the NC list, but could potentially secure 10 percent of the vote and be "recommended" if the recommendation votes were capped. For the pragmatists in HK2020, this is merely a numbers game, unrelated to principles. The problem is: Who would support a plan tailor-made for the allies of HK2020? 

(HK Edition 03/24/2015 page12)

