
Earlier this month, when a study by Freedom House ranked Hong Kong 83rd in press freedom - putting it on a par with countries such as Egypt, Turkey and Central Africa, I wrote a piece entitled "The truth about press freedom in HK". I argued that the freedom of the press was alive and well in this city. 
Now I have second thoughts. 
Journalist and columnist Wat Wing-yin has received death threats. These threats were directed at Wat and her family following the publication of a piece she wrote for Headline Daily on May 14. She argued that Hong Kong people should be less critical of the police after they wrongly suspected an autistic man of manslaughter. Less sympathetic papers wrote that she "claimed she had received death threats", but the fact remains that these threats were posted online. 
More than a 1,000 people marched on Sunday in protest against the threats against Wat and her family. Former reporter and radio host Robert Chow Yung, the organizer of the march, carried a placard reading "Je suis Wat Wing-yin". This was inspired by the slogan coined in support of French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo in the aftermath of January's deadly terrorist attack in Paris. 
Wat did not attend Sunday's march; the police have advised her not to attend public events until the "risk is gone". 
"A new dark force has emerged in today's Hong Kong, and it's called the 'hegemony of democracy'," Wat was quoted as writing in an open letter of gratitude to her supporters. 
"They are more triad than triads; they are effectively terrorists," she added. 
People usually consider Wat to be "pro-government". But I put that in quotes as I don't think that label does her (or the term "pro-government") justice. 
Wikipedia reminds us that Wat was once in trouble on the mainland for attempting to steal military secrets. No matter what Wat's stance on the "Occupy Central" movement or radical dissidents, her biography is not typical of a pro-establishment figure or a "patriot". 
The media is quick to label people. Every time the press mentions someone like me, the readers are always helpfully reminded that we are "pro-Beijing commentators", as if without this piece of information the readers will be lost as to how to make sense of what we are saying. 
Wat is first and foremost an outspoken person who has the courage of her convictions. She is also a mother, which adds a unique sensitivity to her writing that appeals to many Hong Kong people who are sometimes referred to as the "silent majority". Most people in Hong Kong do not adhere to a fixed ideology. They act according to their sense of justice and fairness - concepts rooted in traditional Chinese culture and also our Western-style education. 
What is conspicuously absent here is "public outcry", a term now exclusively used for the dissident's pleasure and benefit. When an anti-government or anti-Beijing journalist receives a threat, the Hong Kong Journalist Association is always quick to express its concern toward such an incident and its implications for "press freedom". Curiously enough, this time the association is reluctant to respond to Wat's case. 
When you look at Wat's entry in Wikipedia, the death threats are not even mentioned. Instead, her response to death threats is mentioned - such as giving up her Ming Pao column. 
One would think the Internet, with its endless amounts of readily available information, would be a fair adjudicator of facts. Wikipedia clearly likes to represent itself as such. With all mechanisms in place to guide volunteer editors (who call themselves Wikipedians), Wikipedia certainly has an air of neutrality. 
But in reality it is not neutral. In Wikipedia and the "mainstream media", acts of injustice toward a "pro-government" figure often go unnoticed. Freedom of press and speech in Hong Kong is a privilege exclusive only to the dissidents and their journalist friends. 




(HK Edition 05/27/2015 page11)

