


      Attending a radio talk show on Monday, Anson Chan, one of the city's veteran opposition leaders, said the electoral reform package put forward by the SAR government was "unfair, unjust, unconstitutional and therefore should not be endorsed".
      
        Chan's claims are sheer nonsense. Let's take a look at the simple facts she prefers to ignore: More than 360,000 people signed their names in support of the SAR government's reform proposals over the weekend. In the days to come over a million citizens are expected to join the massive signing campaign organized by the Alliance for Peace and Democracy in expression of their desire for the city's adoption of universal suffrage in 2017.
        
          Obviously, the overwhelming majority of Hong Kong people don't want their voting rights denied by a tiny minority of opposition lawmakers.
          
            By making such irresponsible remarks, Chan has also chosen to turn a blind eye to all efforts made by the central and the SAR governments to make universal suffrage a reality. The proposals submitted to the Legislative Council are solidly based on two-rounds of citywide public consultations over seven months. Zhang Xiaoming, director of the Central People's Government Liaison Office in the Hong Kong SAR, a few days ago hailed the SAR government's political reform proposals as constitutional, democratic, lawful and reliable. This is because they are in line with the Basic Law, the relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) and the aspirations of Hong Kong people for democracy.
            
              Chan is trying to rob 5 million eligible Hong Kong voters of their legitimate rights. She even claimed that if the proposals were voted down by the Legislative Council, then the five-step process of constitutional reform would start again after 2017. But this is wishful thinking on her part. The NPCSC would not re-launch the whole reform procedure in the foreseeable future if the package were vetoed, at least not right after 2017 as she "forecast". Even if it did, the NPCSC's Aug 31 ruling would still be applied.
              
                By strictly adhering to the five-step process, the electoral arrangements recently rolled out by the government are tailor-made to suit Hong Kong's actual situation under the "One Country, Two Systems" principle. They address the needs and demands of society, and therefore should be deemed as the final version of the 2017 electoral reform package.
                
                  With public opinion and reason on the side of the Hong Kong government, it is time for the opposition camp to abandon the illusion that Beijing might change its mind at last minute. The only way out is to follow the will of the people.
                  
(HK Edition 05/12/2015 page6)

