
The opposition is seeking to transform Hong Kong from a special administrative region of China into an independent political entity through their version of "genuine universal suffrage". It appears they are convinced they need something more drastic than "true democracy" to rally public support. They therefore chose "Hong Kong independence". This idea will be highlighted again in the annual protest on July 1 with such confusing slogans as "regain the future of our city". 
Hong Kong's constitutional development is currently focused on achieving universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive election. It must faithfully follow the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee. During the July 1 protest rally, the opposition will demand amendments to the Basic Law. However, Article 159 of the Basic Law clearly stipulates: "The power of amendment of this Law shall be vested in the National People's Congress." The opposition should know better than to try to change or render the Basic Law irrelevant by using "genuine universal suffrage" as an excuse. 
The constitutional basis for Hong Kong's electoral reform can never be challenged. But more efforts are needed to educate the public about the legality of the government's plans for achieving universal suffrage, particularly emphasizing that it conforms to the "One Country, Two Systems" principle. 
Until 2012 the "spiritual basis" of the opposition's quest for "genuine universal suffrage" drew inspiration mainly from Hong Kong's traditional "core values". Those are sometimes regarded as a legacy of British colonial rule. Since the emergence of separatist groups calling themselves "native activists" in early 2013, the opposition camp has become increasingly inclined to embrace "localism". This is just another name for "independence". The "core values", "localism" and "Hong Kong independence" have something in common: They are all imported from the West. The difference is the "core values" are not in conflict with economic integration between Hong Kong and the mainland, but "localism" and "independence" are. 
This difference is significant to Hong Kong economically and politically. For example, in early 2010, when opposition parties still rallied around "core values", the Democratic Party's moderate leadership made the critical decision which allowed the SAR government to win Legislative Council support for its constitutional reform plans for the CE and LegCo elections in 2012. . 
In 2013 the city witnessed the spread of anti-mainland sentiment by "native activists", while the opposition parties stepped up their campaign for "genuine universal suffrage". The two ideas complement each other. There is no fundamental difference between advocacy of "Hong Kong independence" and "localism" or the "pan-democrat" desire for "real universal suffrage" free from constitutional constraints. Now that the critical minority in LegCo is dominated by advocates of "localism" or "Hong Kong independence", opposition lawmakers are expected to vote against the government's reform package on June 17. 
Whatever the outcome of the LegCo vote on June 17, the government should direct public attention toward socio-economic development, away from pointless political wrangling over "real universal suffrage". This requires the banishing of "localism" and advocacy of "Hong Kong independence". 
The government should also abandon the outdated belief that freedom of speech is incompatible with criticism of concepts harmful to political, economic and social development. In many Western countries disputes over theories and ideas have helped to promote political, economic and social progress. In Hong Kong, the British colonial rulers changed their guiding principle for the territory's development from "non-interference" to "active non-interference" in the 1970s. Now the government is facing an unprecedented challenge - how to adjust its governing paradigm to changing conditions. The CE and his colleagues should take bold action to stop the spread of "localism" or "independence". This is necessary so Hong Kong can promote economic integration with the mainland. 
Traditional "core values" were cultivated when Hong Kong was separated from the motherland. Those "values" are compatible with the early stage of economic integration between Hong Kong and the mainland. To expand economic integration we need to align those "core values" with reality: Hong Kong is an inalienable part of China and the vast majority of Hong Kong residents are Chinese citizens. 
By promoting economic integration with the mainland, Hong Kong can not only facilitate socio-economic development but update its "core values" to implement universal suffrage according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC. 




(HK Edition 06/10/2015 page12)

