


      More resignations are expected as the party continues to be 'hijacked' by young radicals
      
        Democratic Party (DP) veteran Tik Chi-yuen's departure from his party on Wednesday comes as the opposition's old guard is facing growing radicalism within its ranks.
        
          An increasing number of voices within the party - which Tik helped form more than 20 years ago - have asked him to leave. This is because he has been expressing more moderate views during a time of increasingly intolerant party leadership. The Democratic Party is the opposition's camp's largest party.
          
            "There's a problem with the (opposition) leadership because the party is in the process of encouraging younger members to take up leadership roles. But the young members have an inclination to a more radical approach and the leadership is keen to foster this support," Tik explained.
            
              Outwardly, Tik's departure has been met with calmly by opposition leaders who respect his decision, although fellow party founder Emily Lau Wai-hing now questions whether Tik and other opposition supporters ever really shared the same cause.
              
                Lau said all discussions had been free and open - but Tik's views were considered too conciliatory. Such views were no longer accepted by the most strident and radical factions in the party.
                
                  Tik said the Democracy Party had become an opposition party which "no longer accepts different ideas".
                  
                    Political commentator James Sung Lap-kung believes there could be further resignations in the opposition camp. This is because older members, such as Fred Li Wah-ming, are considering leaving amid a growing rift between the old guard and the new.
                    
                      Sung said, "I don't think even Emily Lau can control this kind of split. It will be a bad situation for the opposition in the coming years, as many young members prefer to become more radical or even militant in their tactics."
                      
                        Former secretary for security Regina Ip Lau Suk-yee said the flight of a growing number of senior opposition members showed they were dissatisfied by many of the attitudes of people in the opposition camp.
                        
                          She said the opposition's use of fear to consolidate support and negative campaign tactics prevented it from making deals.
                          
                            Ip said Emily Lau's hawkish attitude to appease radical members had also hindered dialogue with the government.
                            
                              Tik was the first to defend Democratic Party colleague Nelson Wong Sing-chi. Wong was driven out of the party for advocating a more conciliatory approach to constitutional reform in Hong Kong.
                              
                                Wong has remained firm in his stance, declaring he was not afraid to be part of a loyal opposition movement.
                                
                                  Tik said the young people who have hijacked the party were products of their upbringing. They were bombarded by a mass media hypercritical of the government. At the same time, a lack of national education meant young people did not understand the central government's role or the nation's development.
                                  
                                    Widespread use of the Internet had also left an indelible impression on young people, Tik added.
                                    
                                      Hong Kong Democracy Watch's Kevin Law said many of the seminars and online resources which helped launch last year's "Occupy Central" movement came directly from the US government-funded National Endowment for Democracy.
                                      
                                        Young opposition leaders realized that acting as radicals could guarantee considerable media coverage, Tik said.
                                        
                                          His departure as a founding member of an opposition party follows the recent resignation of lawmaker Ronny Tong Ka-wah.
                                          
                                            Regina Ip hoped these departures could lead to a new awakening within the opposition to seek a third way. They could unite together moderate opposition members and break the political impasse.
                                            
                                              Tik and Wong plan to run in the next Legislative Council elections and form a moderate-leaning think tank. They are confident more defections could occur as early as this year's district council elections in November.
                                              
                                                tim@chinadailyhk.com
                                                
(HK Edition 09/11/2015 page7)

