


      Jasper Tsang Yok-sing, president of the Legislative Council (LegCo), said in an interview that all the foreign consuls-general he recently met agreed it would be a significant step forward for Hong Kong to implement universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive (CE) election, regardless of the format it is conducted in.
      
        That suggests most Western democracies understand Hong Kong's constitutional development will make tremendous headway when voters get to elect the next CE by "one person, one vote" in 2017, in accordance with the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC).
        
          The positive views of the foreign consuls-general regarding Hong Kong's electoral reform proposals should be a wake-up call for opposition lawmakers, who have vowed to vote down the SAR government's constitutional reform plan later this year.
          
            Although we would not be surprised if the "pan-democrat" politicians turn a deaf ear to the opinion of the consuls-general, we sincerely hope they would at least ask themselves what exactly they expect to gain from blocking universal suffrage for Hong Kong society in 2017.
            
              There is no question whatsoever that achieving universal suffrage is a common dream of 7 million Hong Kong residents, including members of the opposition camp.
              
                It is therefore extremely unfortunate that the opposition members of LegCo would not let that dream come true for us. However, it would make perfect sense if their motive is to retain the existing system of proportional representation for LegCo elections.
                
                  It is no secret that some of the opposition legislators who are most vocal against the current electoral system in fact owe their political power to such a low-threshold electoral arrangement.
                  
                    Of course none of the "pan-democrats" would ever admit that their reason for blocking the SAR government's electoral reform plan is purely self-interest, but they have yet to convince the public that their decision to defy popular will is completely selfless.
                    
                      They thrive on deceiving people with indefinable labels such as "true democracy" and "genuine universal suffrage", but the number of those who still believe in them has dwindled dramatically thanks to the illegal movement of "Occupy Central" they inflicted on Hong Kong society for 79 days last year.
                      
                        It was an ill-conceived criminal gamble that worked spectacularly against them and they know there is no other way to salvage their doomed political career except keep the current electoral system alive for as long as they can.
                        
(HK Edition 01/26/2015 page7)

