Mexico is a globally significant country with a long and fascinating history. However, in the consciousness of Hong Kong people, especially the education sector, it is still under-valued and under-represented. The opposite is also true for Mexicans with regard to Hong Kong. With this in mind, the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST) chose to visit Mexico's universities during its Autumn 2014 trip. This is to explore the possibility of building ties with oversea universities as part of its internationalization strategy. The visit enjoyed the full support of the Consulate General of Mexico, whose Consul General travelled together with the HKUST delegation. 
The six-day trip that followed was fascinating and included three cities: Mexico City, Monterrey, and Guadalajara. The program included visits to the main universities, meetings with business leaders, think tanks and government officials, and an overview of the country's rich cultural heritage. From HKUST's perspective, the first conclusion of the visit was that Mexico was extremely diverse with a deeply complex history and society, far from the monochromatic depiction of Mexico as viewed by most Hong Kong people through the lens of its huge neighbor to the north - the United States.
Mexico is a large country with a population of 120 million living on 760,000 square miles of land. It has a racially diverse population dating back from Mayan, Aztec, and Spanish colonial days - and even earlier. It is a young democracy, facing the problems of a still emerging economy with a serious wealth gap. This means income distribution is a priority, and probably the country's biggest challenge. The HKUST delegation found the citizens to be most friendly and lively, with a keen appreciation of the arts - for example there are over 150 museums in Mexico City alone, most of them with free admission for citizens. The people are resourceful, and the economy is moving up the value chain, with more sophisticated manufacturing, including car exports - which are the fourth largest in the world. The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) makes Mexico the ideal place from which to operate to access the US market. Furthermore, thanks to the sophisticated and growing middle class, services industries are the fastest growing sector of the economy. Finally, there is a national emphasis on technology and innovation. This is something Mexico knows must originate from its universities.
Professors on the trip were very impressed by the quality of both its public and private universities. Mexico City's National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) has over 300,000 students and is one of the top research universities in Latin America. The Monterrey Institute of Technology has 100,000 students spread over 31 campuses. It has strong education and research ties with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Yale and Cambridge. The University of Guadalajara is located in a wonderful historical town excelling in arts and social sciences. At the other end of the spectrum are the interesting "small" private universities of 10,000 to 20,000 students. 
From Mexico's perspective, the discovery was equally rewarding. HKUST's visit helped Mexican institutions seriously consider Asia, and particularly Hong Kong, as a world-class education and entrepreneurship hub that opens the doors to arguably the most fascinating and dynamic region of the planet to students and researchers.
HKUST encountered an undergraduate population fluent in English and international in outlook. Further, university leaders are increasingly focusing on Asia, shifting the traditional trend to look toward America or Europe. This trend goes hand in hand with the diversification goals of Mexican foreign policy toward Asia, and China in particular. 
For Hong Kong students, Mexico is a gem of a destination for further education and cultural exchanges with top research capabilities, a multicultural setting, privileged geographical location at the crossroads of North and South America, its fascinating arts, culture and history, and the potential business opportunities after education: the ability to help companies in the 12th largest economy in the world, Mexico, and those in the second largest economy in the world, China, to interact with each other.
Likewise, for Mexican students and researchers, Hong Kong is an excellent higher education destination. So far, around 45 Mexican students have seized the opportunities. 
Alicia Buenrostro is the consul-general of Mexico for Hong Kong and Macao. Tony Chan is the president of the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
(HK Edition 02/11/2015 page11)
