
Hong Kong will make itself a rare case in the history of democratic development if it allows a few radical politicians to thwart the city's proposed constitutional reform for election of the Chief Executive (CE) by universal suffrage in 2017. This could otherwise be its greatest ever democratic advancement in the city. 
Ironically, the same politicians who stand in the way call themselves "pan-democrats". 
Unfortunate as this is, it seems that whether the city's 5 million eligible voters will be able to vote in the 2017 election for a new CE rests on an arbitrary decision by a few opposition lawmakers in the Legislative Council. 
The legislature's vetoing mechanism - a system intended to protect the minority from the tyranny of the majority, is now being exploited and abused by the minority to the detriment of the democratic advancement of the city. It makes a mockery of democracy as well as of the popular will. 
The strong aspirations of the majority of Hong Kong society to achieve direct suffrage in 2017 have been clearly expressed in the numerous opinion polls in recent months. But turning a blind eye to this, the "pan-democrat" lawmakers have flatly boycotted the second round of public consultations on electoral reform and vow to veto any reform package based on the legal framework laid down by the nation's top legislature last August. Nothing could more starkly demonstrate their contempt for the public will, than this. 
This explicit contempt for public opinion makes it all the more important for citizens to remind "pan-democrat" lawmakers what their mandate is really for and to whom they owe it: It comes from citizens and should be used only for the common good of society. The "pan-democrat" lawmakers should be reminded: In the exercise of their mandate, they should be in the service of the people, rather than their own political agenda; otherwise their mandate will be recalled sooner or later. 
By launching a five-day campaign and providing citizens with a platform to speak out on their desire for universal suffrage, the Alliance for Peace and Democracy is doing Hong Kong people a great favor. For the sake of Hong Kong achieving universal suffrage as early as 2017, citizens should seize every opportunity and platform, including this one, to make their voice heard. This is the first step, a necessary one, to allow the popular will to prevail. 




(HK Edition 02/06/2015 page10)

