
Govt report forecasts vastly increased housing supply in the next 10 years
Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying said Tuesday that the government's effort to increase the supply of housing since he took office in 2012 is beginning to produce results.
A 54-page Report on the Work of the Current-term Government in its Third Year, which was uploaded to the government's website, evaluates progress in three major initiatives - economic development, improvement of people's livelihood and promoting democracy.
On the livelihood front, the government predicted that a total of 20,000 private residential units will be completed next year, a record high in 10 years, and 70 percent higher than the average annual supply of newly completed apartments in the past decade.
"I hope this could start to ease up the accumulated housing demand from past years," Leung said at a media briefing. "The government will also increase land supply, and we hope to get support for our efforts from all walks of life," he said.
By 2016, which will be his fourth year in office, the construction of many residential projects that began after Leung came to office will be completed, a clear indication that his housing policy is moving on the right track.
However, property analysts criticized the report for selectively addressing the results while evading the major issues, such as skyrocketing housing prices, which soared by an average of 13 percent last year.
"We agree that the government is adding more units in the market, but it's unfair to compare to progress in the last decade, which barely saw any new residential project being built," said Andy Kwan Cheuk-chiu, director of the ACE Centre for Business and Economic Research and also a member of Long Term Housing Strategy Steering Committee.
Kwan and others said that the projected supply is clearly not enough to meet expected demand from prospective home buyers.
The report also stated the government's housing supply target of 480,000 units the 10-year period from 2015, with a private sector accounting for a 40 percent share. Public housing will account for the other 60 percent of total supply.
The public housing supply target is 290,000 units, comprising 200,000 public rental housing units and 90,000 subsidized apartments for sale to qualified buyers. The private housing supply target is 190,000 units.
"I think the government really has made great efforts to increase housing supply," said Vincent Cheung, a Cushman & Wakefield director for valuation and advisory services in Greater China. "The policy does not seem to be drifting from the status quo," he said.
In the economic development sector, the government report highlights the implementation of the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect Program and mutual recognition of funds with the mainland.
The report also says the government has achieved its main objectives in the past year. These objectives included moderate economic growth, virtual full employment, low inflation and a reasonable budgetary surplus.
agnes@chinadailyhk.com









A government report on Tuesday sets housing supply target of 480,000 units in the 10-year period from 2015, with a private sector accounting for a 40 percent share. Public housing will account for the other 60 percent of total supply. Xaume Olleros / Bloomberg





(HK Edition 06/24/2015 page6)

