


      Editor's note: This is the second article on the astute, in-depth proposals by the author for reformation of our 18 district councils, so that both administratively and politically they better represent their constituencies. In this concluding part, the author makes specific suggestions for improving their efficiency.
      
        Arguably, Hong Kong's district councils have many areas for reform that have still not even been discussed by the district councilors themselves. In my previous article, I explored several areas. Here I will touch on other areas for possible reform.
        
          The existing area committees (ACs) under each district management committee should be reformed. Traditionally, ACs have been co-opting district activists and community leaders through a political network so they can serve their districts meaningfully. However, this system of district-level consultation remains kaifong-based (neighborhood-based). It does not really function as an effective check against the government officials dealing with issues and concerns in the 18 districts. A more meaningful reform would be to designate elected district council members as chairpersons responsible for the management of ACs. This in turn would establish a dense network of ACs chaired by elected district politicians. This means that government officials would finally have to give serious consideration to the issues raised by ACs. At present, the ACs look like toothless kaifong bodies without strong linkages or accountable relationships with their respective district councils. A much bolder revamp will be necessary to reconnect long-neglected ACs with the elected district council members and, more importantly, ensure appropriate government responsiveness to the demands of district councils.
          
            Secondary schools should regularly be invited to pay visits to all district councils, and students should also be invited to observe the meetings of all councils. This is so council members and government officials can operate under the spotlight of these young public representatives. Occasionally, when district issues turn controversial, the mass media's interest will suddenly be ignited and their focus turned to the district councils concerned. But this spasmodic media attention cannot sustain the public accountability of all 18 councils. Bearing in mind the importance of district administration, measures should be taken to stimulate public interest and encourage public participation in these meetings. Being under public scrutiny will prompt a more effective performance by both district councilors and government officials in resolving public issues.
            
              All district councils should issue a Performance Pledge. This is so citizens will understand the platforms and policies of all the councils, which at present are weak in dealing with sports policy and issues relating to recreational facilities. If councils are empowered sufficiently and councilors and government officials are made accountable, district administration will improve significantly to cope with the increasing diversity of the population in the coming decade. Improved district administration will arguably be far more important than highly ideological debates at the territorial level. This is because ultimately district governance will win the hearts and minds of the citizens, enhance performance legitimacy of the government and elected councilors, and make citizens feel that their participation can make a difference to how Hong Kong will be governed at the grassroots level - a subject that arguably has long been neglected in Hong Kong. It is worth remembering that most citizens are more concerned with what impacts their lives directly than political and ideological debates which they cannot relate to.
              
                The power and responsibilities of councils should be enhanced by giving them jurisdiction over recreational and sports policy. At present, the overall responsibility for dealing with recreation is given to the Leisure and Cultural Services Department, but there is no end to the number of public complaints about how swimming pools, tennis courts and other facilities are being misused. It is time for the government to decentralize the administration of sports facilities to the relevant subcommittees of the 18 district councils so they can scrutinize management of these facilities more closely, and respond to complaints more expeditiously. Moreover, sports policy remains relatively underdeveloped. Elite sports like cycling and bowling get government funding, but mass sports, notably soccer, remain underfunded. A balance can be struck between elite and mass sports development by allowing councils to formulate a more coherent sports policy at the district level. Soccer stadiums, for example, could be fully integrated under the Hong Kong Football Association, while primary and secondary school teams could be incorporated into various soccer clubs in the districts concerned. These changes would bring a healthy development in sports policy complemented by the increased accountability of the councils.
                
                  Since the early 2000s, Hong Kong has wasted too much time on political disputes. Let us now go forward by reforming district councils and their administration through grassroots democracy, genuine accountability and better recreational and sports policies.
                  
                    The author is professor and head of the Department of Social Sciences at the Hong Kong Institute of Education. He has been studying district administration in Hong Kong for a long time.
                    
(HK Edition 09/21/2015 page9)

