


      James Ning writes that the late handover negotiator devoted his life to serving the interests of the Chinese nation, especially those of Hong Kong and Macao
      
        Last Sunday I was saddened by the news that Lu Ping, former director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the State Council, had died earlier in Beijing. He was 88.
        
          I never had the honor of meeting Lu but admired him very much growing up and later as a journalist in Hong Kong. Many times I wished I had known him personally, mainly because of my mother. She was Lu's classmate at St John's University in Shanghai in the 1940s and told me a lot about their days as student activists. She is proud she met and became friends and comrades with people like Lu at such a young age. He undoubtedly had an early influence on her politically before they eventually moved north and settled in Beijing after the founding of the People's Republic of China in October 1949.
          
            The Hong Kong press almost unanimously mentioned that Lu once called Chris Patten, the last colonial governor of Hong Kong, "a sinner for 1,000 years".
            
              This quote has been associated with Patten and Lu for years. It is a reference to someone forever loathed as a sinner by the Chinese nation. It also reflects the tendency of the liberal press to sensationalize things, but Lu's legacy is so much more than this catchy phrase.
              
                It is no secret Lu met Patten on numerous occasions throughout the 1990s when China and Britain fought over the issue of Hong Kong's handover. Of course, Lu had been involved in extensive bilateral negotiations long before Patten became the last British governor. To Chinese people, Patten deserved the ugly distinction of being "a sinner for 1,000 years" for what he did to Hong Kong during his tenure in 1992-97. This was in violation of multiple agreements between the two governments.
                
                  Lu and his colleagues worked extremely hard during years of bilateral negotiations that culminated in agreements between the Chinese government and its British counterparts. These were aimed at ensuring a smooth transfer of sovereign rule over Hong Kong back to China. They were understandably angry to see their efforts sabotaged by Patten with "democratic reforms" designed to prolong British influence in Hong Kong. This has proved damaging to the prosperity and stability of Hong Kong ever since the handover. That is why Lu made his famous comment about Patten.
                  
                    Patten was carrying out the British government's plan to undermine China's sovereign rule over Hong Kong after 1997. But he also wanted to be remembered for posterity as the person who gave Hong Kong people their first taste of limited Western democracy before colonial rule ended. He might have gotten what he wished for from people back in London - but certainly not from Chinese people, including many Hong Kong residents like me. I for one believe Lu was speaking on behalf of all Chinese people when he said Patten would be remembered as a "sinner" for generations to come. Having experienced the political disruptions Patten's "democratic reforms" led to in the past 23 years, especially the illegal "Occupy Central" movement last year, I'm sure many people would agree the last governor was at least partly responsible for many of problems still plaguing us today.
                    
                      I was not surprised some Western commentators as well as locals in Hong Kong thought Lu had gone too far with his harsh characterization of Patten. But they obviously had never experienced the kind of humiliation that people suffered under colonialism.
                      
                        In the weeks leading up to the handover ceremony I worked on a photo exhibition chronicling major events that proceeded that momentous day. It was then I learned in considerable detail that Lu was one of the central government officials in charge of Hong Kong and Macao affairs. He had played a vital role in negotiations with British officials over the future of Hong Kong and the content of the Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law.
                        
                          Lu devoted much of his life to serving the interests of the Chinese nation, particularly on matters concerning the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macao. Politically biased people can call him what they want. But they cannot deny that he was a true patriot. Lu will be remembered as such by the Chinese nation forever.
                          
                            The author is a staff writer.
                            
(HK Edition 05/06/2015 page10)

