








A total of 200 members of The Committee of 100 celebrates the 10th anniversary of the committee's Leadership Scholarship Program in Shanghai on Tuesday. Gao Erqiang / China Daily Program established to recognize and foster young Chinese leaders of tomorrow 
The Committee of 100 Leadership Scholarship Program celebrated its 10th anniversary on Tuesday in Shanghai. 
The Leadership Scholarship Program (LSP) partners with more than 10 universities in China to help Chinese post-graduates reach their potential through scholarships. 
During the daylong event, 28 students received scholarships and became the newest members of a group of next-generation leaders. The students were selected for their leadership aptitude, commitment to public service and academic excellence. 
Current students come from a wide range of academic fields. 
After the ceremony, the honorees got to attend two panel sessions held by experts on leadership and innovation entrepreneurship, and US-China relations. They also participated in a mentoring program with current members of the Committee of 100. 
"The young leaders from the US and China will play important roles to improve the civil democracy between two countries," Herman Li, Committee of 100 acting chairman, said at the event. 
The Committee of 100 Leadership Scholarship Program was established in 2005 with the goal of recognizing and fostering the leadership potential of young Chinese students. 
The program rewards and recognizes those students who demonstrate excellence while encouraging candidates to embrace a global vision of success. So far, more than 200 postgraduate and doctoral students from 14 universities across the country have been awarded scholarships. 
"The Committee of 100 has been keen to promote the constructive conversation and relationship among people and leaders between the US and China by launching the scholarship program, which will affect US-China relations eventually," said Li. 
Established in 1990, the Committee of 100 addresses issues significant to Chinese Americans and US-China relations. 
The Committee of 100 is made up of more than 150 distinguished Chinese Americans from the arts, business, academia, public service and the sciences. 
yuran@chinadaily.com.cn 

 
 
