


      Three senior central government officials met with more than 50 members of the Legislative Council in Shenzhen on Sunday. The meeting was widely considered one of the central government's last efforts to win support from opposition lawmakers for the SAR government's electoral reform package. Most people in Hong Kong were disappointed, but not surprised that opposition lawmakers still oppose the government's reform proposals.
      
        As expected the opposition lawmakers who attended the Sunday meeting were critical of the central government's refusal to accept their unconstitutional demands. They sound as if they had actually expected Beijing to make an exception of existing laws for their sake. This gave people the impression that these legislators - who consider themselves democrats - do not value procedural justice or respect people's wishes. It apparently never occurred to them that their conduct toward the Basic Law and decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee concerning Hong Kong's constitutional development has put them in a very negative light politically.
        
          The three senior officials of the central government on Sunday again expressed the hope the opposition lawmakers would abandon their undemocratic tactics and support the reforms so 5 million eligible Hong Kong voters can elect the Chief Executive by "one person, one vote" in 2017. This hope is based on the understanding some opposition lawmakers can be persuaded to respect the wishes of the majority and vote for the reforms if they are allowed to act independently.
          
            The central government has always maintained the CE does not have to agree with Beijing on every issue, but must make decisions in the best interests of Hong Kong and the nation. This is the definition of "love the nation, love Hong Kong" and being accountable to Hong Kong people as well as to the central government. The "pan-democrats" need not worry about their chances of being nominated as CE election candidates if they commit themselves to meet this basic requirement. Unfortunately they have not shown the courage to heed the public's wishes. They have failed to serve the best interests of Hong Kong as well as those of the nation. But why?
            
              Some people may be tempted to blame Beijing for the opposition's confrontational attitudes. But such feelings are very personal. They really have little to do with the public interest. Members of the opposition camp let their "survival instincts" dictate their political actions instead of heeding public wishes. That is why they failed to win majority support for their unconstitutional demands and unlawful actions from society. They chose to go against the popular will because they know they themselves will not do very well under universal suffrage.
              
(HK Edition 06/02/2015 page13)

