Secretary for Justice Rimsky Yuen Kwok-keung met with "pan-democratic" Legislative Council (LegCo) members last Monday. This was in another effort to persuade them to change their minds and support historic steps toward implementing universal suffrage in Hong Kong, in accordance with the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China and decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC). Yuen promised that the government would try to establish a lower threshold for candidates aspiring to be nominated by the Nominating Committee for the Chief Executive (CE) by universal suffrage in 2017.
Hong Kong residents across the social spectrum agree the "pan-democrats" must enter the CE election race according to existing laws - like everybody else. Many people are even willing to support the lowering of the nomination process "threshold" for the sake of the opposition, provided such changes are within the scope of existing laws. After all, no democratic system can survive without the rule of law. And laws around the world stipulate democratic elections must be fair and just. This means no person or political party can be given preferential treatment. In Hong Kong's case, there is no justification to change the rules for the sake of the opposition merely because they hold the critical minority in LegCo. They have vowed to veto any electoral reform plans that comply with the Basic Law and NPCSC decisions. 
The "pan-democrat" camp should abandon attempts to stop local residents having the right to enjoy universal suffrage. They should join the CE election by universal suffrage the same as everybody else. Is this too much to ask?
Constitutional reform is now in its final stages after the second round of public consultations ended last month. The SAR government is making its last efforts to implement universal suffrage according to the Basic Law and the decisions of the NPCSC. This is in response to strong public demand forcing "pan-democratic" lawmakers to cooperate and join the public majority in supporting the government's plans for constitutional reform. The opposition have always regarded themselves as "champions of democracy" representing the popular will. But it has refused to recognize that most people seem to want universal suffrage implemented within the constitutional framework of the Basic Law and the decisions of the NPCSC. This includes the "Aug 31 decision", as shown in many recent public opinion polls. By insisting on vetoing any plans for electoral reform founded on this legal framework, the "pan-democrats" appear deceitful. How can the public trust them with the interests of Hong Kong society?
The NPCSC's "Aug 31 framework decision" on the method for selecting the CE by universal suffrage is designed to ensure the Nominating Committee is broadly representative of all sectors of Hong Kong society. This is a fundamental principle of representative democracy. Under this legally binding framework all CE election hopefuls are subject to the same scrutiny by the Nominating Committee first and the voting public next. It treats all those involved as equals before the law.
But the "pan-democrats" have chosen to fight against this instead of respecting the popular will. They do this at the expense of their own credibility. They are only concerned with their own agenda. After all their other strategies failed to gain public support, they decided to deny people the chance of universal suffrage. They are doing this by vetoing any electoral reform plans that comply with the "Aug 31 framework decision".
If this is the "pan-democratic" way of telling the central government to "satisfy us or watch Hong Kong suffer" while punishing local residents, they should be prepared to face the consequences. This will occur in upcoming district council elections this fall and legislative elections next year. These elections may very well end their political careers. This is how a real democracy works.
The author is a veteran current affairs commentator.
(HK Edition 04/08/2015 page9)

