
The late Elsie Tu's concept of democracy is arguably a distinctive one that had much in common with many developing countries' version of democracy. While the Western version of democracy is characterized by the rotation of political parties in power, plus the checks and balances among the three branches of a government - executive, judiciary and legislature - Tu's vision of democracy focused on all the necessary procedures and policies that could bring about efficient governance in the service of ordinary people. 
Her fight to alleviate poverty, assist the underprivileged, provide legal aid for the needy and the poor, and her constant struggle against corruption long before the establishment of the Independent Commission Against Corruption testified to her focus on the procedures and processes necessary to bring about good government in Hong Kong. 
She also equated the end of British colonialism in Hong Kong with a triumph of democracy here. In this sense, Tu was a champion of self-rule - meaning that local people should govern Hong Kong rather than allowing the colonists to continue to administer the territory. Her anti-colonial instincts and fervor were most unusual since she was born in Britain, which had a vast colonial empire in the 18th and 19th centuries. 
Tu did participate in the electoral process before Hong Kong's handover in 1997. As an elected Urban Council member she strove to improve the urban environment, public health and the people's well-being. Although she was twice defeated by the late Szeto Wah in direct elections, her participation demonstrated that she accepted the existing rules of the game in our political system. Electoral participation, to her, could propel democracy forward, even though the result of the election would be unfavorable to her. Hence, she was a stalwart democrat fighting for the interests of ordinary people through the institutional framework and arrangements. 
Tu was an independent political operator who shunned any interest group or party politics. Her withdrawal from the Reform Club, after five years' membership, demonstrated that she did not rely on political organization to achieve her ideal democracy. Instead, she stood alone and fought all the way for ordinary people, meeting many ordinary citizens every day, listening to their needs and dealing with their predicaments through her lobbying actions, contacts with government officials, and individual protests. She was an action-oriented and stand-alone politician who did not rely on any organizational assistance. 
Critics claimed that Tu became a "conservative" in her later years. Such criticism failed to understand that from the beginning to the end she adopted a unique version of democracy different from that of Western liberals. In a sense, she was a pragmatic social activist incessantly championing the ordinary people's interests at grassroots level, regardless of ideology. She was, in effect, a political aberration - by being one of the most influential social and political activists of her time without being affiliated to any political party and so enjoying the benefits of its support. 
She also developed an abiding faith that Hong Kong after its return to China would prosper more than ever politically and economically under the management of Hong Kong people. In other words, Tu felt certain that Deng Xiaoping's envisioned formula of "One Country, Two Systems" with a high degree of autonomy would take Hong Kong to a new level of success, as she never doubted the competence of Hong Kong people would equal, if not exceed, that of the colonial administrators they would be replacing. 
Her faith toward Hong Kong extended beyond the territory's future after 2047. She said that the central government would surely come up with a good plan for Hong Kong's administration after 2047. 
Overall, Elsie Tu was a unique social and political activist in Hong Kong's history, straddling the colonial and post-colonial eras. Being an anti-colonialist, she had profound faith in the people of Hong Kong, and the Chinese people in general, to improve the socio-political systems of not only Hong Kong but also the mainland as a whole. Most importantly, she equated good governance with democracy, believing that the elements of good governance embraced the integrity of civil servants, the responsiveness of the government to the needs and demands of the people, the fight against poverty and social injustice, and the willingness of citizens to participate in the existing electoral processes. Her version of democracy is actually being implemented successfully in some developing nations in the world today. 
The author is a professor and head of the Department of Social Sciences at the Hong Kong Institute of Education and a long-time observer of developments in Hong Kong. 




(HK Edition 12/15/2015 page12)

