
Wang Shengwei believes success of 'One Country, Two Systems' depends on cultivating genuine patriotism toward the motherland, and not in so-called genuine democracy 
The world has witnessed exponential growth in China since Deng Xiaoping announced a new "open door" policy in 1978 to transform the nation's economy. Although much improvement still needs to be made, the progress China has made since is indisputable. 
Domestically, the ambitious "Made in China 2025" blueprint aims to turn the country into a global, innovative and high-tech manufacturing power by 2049, and the anti-corruption campaign targets endemic problems such as bureaucracy and nepotism, not just catching and punishing corrupt officials. 
Internationally, 57 countries have so far joined the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) to boost regional growth, while the "One Belt, One Road" initiative, which has the support of nearly 60 countries, aims to spur economic development along the ancient Silk Road and strengthen China's global influence. 
While mainland people continue to pursue development on multiple fronts to help realize the "China Dream", Hong Kong has seen social acrimony and economic stagnation after two years of political infighting on and off the streets. 
Now that the electoral reform blueprint for electing Hong Kong's next Chief Executive in 2017 has been vetoed, reverting the election of the city's leader to the status quo of 2012 and preventing 5 million eligible voters from participating in the CE election, the public will no doubt make known what they think of the opposition's veto when they cast their votes in next year's Legislative Council elections. 
Frankly speaking, neither Beijing nor CE Leung Chun-ying has lost anything since Beijing does not have a problem accepting the 1,200-strong Election Committee, and Leung's handling of this unprecedented political crisis may win him a second term. However, few believe that Hong Kong can restore its normal state of peace and harmony soon. 
Hong Kong people are having a lot of worries. Radical groups advocating anti-mainland sentiment and resisting Beijing's influence over the city have emerged in recent years, with some gaining prominence in the past few months. 
This was evident with the recent arrests of 10 core members of the "National Independent Party" days before legislators began debating the city's historic political reform plans. The police allegedly smashed a plot by activists to set off bombs in a futile bid to derail the democratic process. The radicals even warned on Facebook that if the reform bill was passed, the "LegCo would become the second Ukrainian ruins". These radicals showed their true colors during a rally earlier this month by burning a copy of the Basic Law. Since the Basic Law provides for "One Country, Two Systems", one must ask if they prefer instead to have "One Country, One System". 
Moreover, Chin Wan, head of Hong Kong Resurgence, considered by many as the godfather of "localism", published an article recently in The New York Times saying "Hong Kong and mainland China should treat each other in the future as equal members of a formal Chinese confederation". Other groups, including the "Hong Kong Independence Party", which was established in Britain early this year, have pledged support for those fighting for "self-determination" and to "help them in the process of nation-building and return to the British Commonwealth". 
How did Hong Kong nurture these separatists? And what can be done to prevent these tiny sparks from turning into conflagrations? 
First of all, we must understand the source of separatism. Many Hong Kong residents did not have the concept of Chinese nation before or after the handover. During the colonial period, the British did nothing to help Hong Kong people develop a Chinese national identity, or actively encourage them to treat Britain as their motherland. Hong Kong people were thus left in a limbo in so far as national identity is concerned. Following the handover, suddenly, there was a country and a central government exercising sovereignty over them. 
This has created a great psychological barrier among some Hong Kong residents, albeit just a minority, in accepting China as their motherland that deserves their undivided allegiance. As a result, they protested against proposals to implement Article 23 of the Basic Law in 2003 and campaigned against the introduction of "national education" as a compulsory subject in schools in 2012. 
Secondly, many Hong Kong people neither understand nor accept the "consultative democracy" practiced on the Chinese mainland. They just dislike the Beijing government and the Communist Party of China. They regard the Hong Kong reform blueprint as "fake" democracy because it involves a Nominating Committee. In reality, the Chinese model has not only made China the second most powerful country in the world, it's now being considered by many countries as a possible alternative to their existing Western democratic model. Clearly, many have taken to heart Deng Xiaoping's famous remarks: It does not matter whether a cat is black or white. It's a good cat as long as it can catch mice. 
All Hong Kong people who love their country must now work together to counter the separatists' destructive maneuver. With time, Hong Kong people will realize that the success of "One Country, Two Systems" depends solely on cultivating genuine patriotism toward the motherland, and not in so-called genuine democracy. 




(HK Edition 06/24/2015 page8)

