
The HKSAR's first chief executive Tung Chee-hwa urged moderate "pan-democrats" on Wednesday to change their minds in support of the electoral reform package tabled by the government last week. 
It was the second time in three months - the fourth in a year that Tung has come out to appeal for public support for the reforms. As a vice-chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) - and perhaps also as a man of conscience, his words carry considerable weight. When he speaks, most residents listen. 
Indeed, the city's democratic development is now at the crossroads. The opposition camp knows full well universal suffrage is what most Hong Kong people want. They also know that it is in the best interest of the SAR if the reform bill is passed. But some moderate lawmakers in the camp worry they will be labeled as "traitors of democracy". As such, they are being "tied up" - unwillingly or unwittingly, by a small band of political radicals. These radicals want them to veto the package - even though the moderates don't want to. 
This has long been the Achilles heel of many members of the opposition camp. However, for the sake of Hong Kong it is worth overcoming this problem. To right the wrong and to switch side courage - together with a political conscience - is needed. For those rational opposition lawmakers who refuse to be bullied, it is time to show vision, commitment and political courage. Conscience votes count. They are essential if Hong Kong people's aspiration for "one person, one vote" is ever to be fulfilled. 
As Tung pointed out, universal suffrage in 2017 is just a starting point for the city's dream of democracy. It will provide a solid foundation for Hong Kong to further develop its constitutional system. Meeting with a visiting delegation of the Hong Kong Bar Association in Beijing on Wednesday, Wang Guangya, director of the State Council's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, also said the Chief Executive election method could be amended in future in light of the actual situation in the SAR and if it is done in a gradual, orderly manner. 
At this turning point in history, it is not too late for the opposition to answer the call by respecting mainstream opinion and to allow rather than stymie the passage of the reform package. They should think twice about their historic responsibility: By rejecting 5 million voters' legitimate right to vote for their leader in 2017, the opposition lawmakers are effectively standing on the wrong side of history. 
Those who continue to strongly oppose the central and SAR governments should be left out in the cold. But clear-minded moderates should act immediately and intelligently. They should change their minds and support the reform package. 




(HK Edition 04/30/2015 page10)

