


      Chan Tak-Leung says Britain's recent election has lessons for HK and shows that voters ultimately support parties who pursue the most responsible economic policies
      
        The recent UK election provides many lessons for Hong Kong's "pan-democrat" legislators on why universal suffrage is a step forward in democracy and is a preferable model to vetoing the electoral reform package which would result in a continuation of the status quo - the election of the next Chief Executive by a 1,200-member Election Committee.
        
          Lesson No 1, in 2010 Britain's voters returned a hung parliament. Consequently, the Conservative Party had to form a coalition government with the Liberal Democrats (Lib-Dems).
          
            In the election last week, voters returned a Conservative government, albeit with a small majority. Ask yourself the question, why British voters, despite complaints about five years of austerity and drastic changes to the welfare system, still trust the Conservatives rather that their nemesis the Labour Party which promised more welfare, lower university tuition fees and tax increases for high income earners? The answer is simple, voters know who they can trust running the British economy - the choice was between David Cameron and his team who has so far delivered the best economic results in Europe or Ed Miliband who claimed that once elected, he would cut the deficit, maintain welfare benefits and increase public spending but without telling voters where the funds would come from. In other words, while there may have been two potential candidates to form the next government, voters put their faith in the party they trusted the most.
            
              This is the power of universal suffrage.
              
                The proposed electoral reform package for Hong Kong stands to give potential CE candidates the same opportunity to tell voters what they have achieved and what their policies will be once elected. So unless "pan-democrat" legislators believe their candidates have no record for voters to see. They have no vision for the future of Hong Kong; only in such a case need they fear a fair election with 5 million eligible voters casting their votes.
                
                  If this is not the case, then there is no need to veto the proposal and jeopardize the democratization of Hong Kong.
                  
                    Lesson No 2, as coalition partners the Lib-Dems suffered a humiliating defeat with their number of parliamentary seats reduced from 56 to 8. Why? The answer is simple. The Lib-Dems never envisaged they would be elected into a position of power; hence they made numerous "uncosted promises" in their 2010 manifesto and the killer blow was that while they promised to cut university tuition fees if they were elected, the opposite happened - the government increased fees for home students from 6000 pounds to 9000 pounds per year. Voters remembered what the Lib-Dems promised and the party was punished.
                    
                      Potential candidates in the election for the CE in 2017 must therefore take note when they stand for election - voters will see through slogans and sound bites. They must mean what they say and be truthful with the electorate. CE candidates must have concrete policies that they can deliver should they be elected.
                      
                        Lesson No 3, the first appointment for Cameron was to visit Buckingham Palace and seek permission from the Queen to form a new government. Likewise, potential CE candidates must remember that they will have to go through a similar process to have their appointment confirmed by the central government under the "One Country, Two Systems" principle and the Basic Law.
                        
                          In other words, those "pan-democrat" legislators and activists who have called for support for their brand of democracy, received off the record briefings and even funding for their subversive activities in Hong Kong need not apply. They must know that no one is above the constitution of the land.
                          
                            Lesson No 4, in his first speech outside No 10 Downing Street, Cameron guaranteed that he would govern the UK as "one nation" and secondly, he would continue with the devolution of powers for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. All governments, without exception, have to deal with division, conflict and the various demands from different parts of the nation or regions under their governance.
                            
                              Hong Kong is no different. The new CE will need to listen to views from all sectors of the community, be advised by the Executive Council and make informed decisions in order to improve both the livelihood and governance of the SAR. This is based on the administrative and legislative frameworks available at their disposal.
                              
                                Agreeing to the current proposals for the 2017 CE election is definitely not the end of the road: It is the beginning of universal suffrage in Hong Kong. There will be further opportunities to improve it in future.
                                
                                  One final note, I notice that many people in Hong Kong are celebrating "Mother's Day" on May 10. "Pan-democrat" legislators, if they understand the "One Country, Two Systems" principle, perhaps they should recognize China as the mother figure for Hong Kong over the last 18 years. Hong Kong has benefited from many policies as a result. Economically speaking, the introduction of CEPA in 2003, Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect last year and the impending opening of the Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect, to name a few. This is on top of the improved transport connections and the maintenance of its status as the freest city in the world by the Index of Economic Freedom. These surely are signs of a mother who has nothing but the best interests of her child.
                                  
                                    Mutual respect and observance of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle and the Basic Law are vital cornerstones for continuing prosperity, freedom and democratic development in the SAR. Let's hope "pan-democrat" legislators will take note of this.
                                    
                                      The author is the director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                                      
(HK Edition 05/18/2015 page9)

