
Chen Zuo'er, former deputy director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the State Council, made some comments on Sunday about Hong Kong. All print and electronic media here invariably gave prominence to two words Chen mentioned in a speech at a forum on Hong Kong's place and role in the country's development strategy - decolonization and "de-sinofication". 
Chen spoke in the capacity of chairman of the Chinese Association of Hong Kong and Macao Studies and as one involved in the process of resuming Chinese sovereign rule over Hong Kong and Macao in the 1980s and 1990s. Because he did not elaborate on the term decolonization, in Hong Kong some local commentators have let their imagination take over their efforts to "make sense" of his comments. 
A few opposition politicians expressed "worries" that by decolonization Chen could be sending a signal on behalf of the central government that everything inherited from the colonial era should be discarded. It is not at all surprising that those people felt threatened by the word decolonization, since most if not all of them were beneficiaries of the colonial rule one way or another. But their "fear" is completely groundless if not ill-founded. 
Hong Kong was a British colony for more than one and a half centuries. Like in other colonies, there was widespread discrimination against the local population and inequality between the ruling class and the working masses in Hong Kong throughout the colonial era. Many members of the older generations as well as historical records can testify there was rampant corruption in the government and particularly the British-controlled police. And there was no self-determination or democracy for Hong Kong society, or the so-called separation of powers for that matter. 
Those who still savor the "good old days" when Hong Kong was a colony of the British Empire are apparently brainwashed to believe colonialism is the best thing that has ever happened to the city. They may be dreaming of a return of colonial rule, but they certainly do not represent the great majority of Hong Kong people. 
Chen's remarks about decolonization may not be specific enough to tell us what exactly he has in mind other than removing anything that jeopardizes the country's sovereignty, security and development interests. But the decolonization of some people's thinking may be a good start. 




(HK Edition 09/22/2015 page8)

