



The prospect of further delays to the establishment of an Innovation and Technology Bureau will no doubt frustrate the community - particularly the business and technology sectors. 
Hong Kong is in dire need of an upgrade to its industry along with further economic diversification. This is essential for the city to shore up its sagging competitiveness, maintain long-term prosperity, as well as to tackle many of its deep-seated social problems. And the fact that previous efforts, by both government agencies and the private sector over the years, have failed to achieve these ends adds credibility to the notion that Hong Kong does indeed require a dedicated government department for promoting innovation and technological development. A specialized bureau will go a long way to achieving this by formulating consistent strategies, coordinating both government and private efforts and cooperating with partners across borders, among other things. 
Unfortunately, the SAR government's attempt to launch the specialist bureau is most likely to suffer further setbacks: Its establishment will be further delayed for months if filibustering by radical lawmakers continues. 
The long delay in establishing the proposed specialist bureau, which was first suggested more than two years ago, and more importantly, that many of the SAR government's other policy initiatives in recent years have failed to go through the Legislative Council, highlights the cold truth: Radical lawmakers have turned the people's mandate to act for the common good of society into an instrument for pursuing narrow party interests or political gains for themselves. As a result, Hong Kong society has suffered, both socially and economically. 
What is even more unfortunate, is the fact that a good number of the electorate in the city have helped perpetuate this disgraceful situation. Having repeatedly returned this very same group of radical lawmakers to the legislature with their ballots, those voters can hardly absolve themselves from blame. Their ballots have given radical politicians license to abuse this mandate and enthusiastically take livelihood policies or measures hostage in the pursuit of their own agenda. 
It is time for voters to wake up from the delusion that these self-styled "democrats" can help advance democracy in Hong Kong or achieve anything for society. They can't. 
By habitually performing childish stunts in the legislature to attract media coverage - rather than deliberating on legislation within the boundaries of reason and pragmatism, they only produce what ultimately only turn out to be more ammunition for the media. 
For the sake of the long-term prosperity of Hong Kong, those who have helped put the radical politicians into the legislature are obliged to rectify this situation by casting out the radicals with their ballots in next year's elections to select the legislature. The future and prosperity of Hong Kong is in the hands of voters. 

(HK Edition 02/10/2015 page9)

