
In all probability, an abusive partner will not be abusive in the beginning stages of his or her relationship and, even as the problem deteriorates, does not always use physical violence. It is rare for an abuser to physically assault their partner prior to beginning a pattern of verbal abuse and emotional control. It is likely the abuse begins in very subtle ways - through attacks on the other person's feelings of self-worth, his or her abilities as a person, and by slowly isolating him or her from others. 
Above are tips on the early detection of domestic violence. But from the pattern described we can see an uncanny resemblance with the political extremism now unfolding in Hong Kong. 
Undermining opponents' self-worth through verbal abuse has become the dissidents' standard tactic. For example, in his first question-and-answer session in the current legislative year, Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying was not only greeted by the now common projectile-throwing acts, but was also asked by Raymond Wong Yuk-man, "When will you die?" 
Surely, such abuse could progress to physical violence. 
The Hong Kong police are searching for 10 suspects following a small explosion in a bin outside the Legislative Council building on Dec 9. From a photo released of the suspects, it can be seen these people were trying to pretend they are terrorists by dressing in black and hiding their faces with hoodies. I am not quite sure what the other eight suspects did. If all they did was to set fire to a rubbish bin, honestly, that is a bit underwhelming. 
It was understood that the suspects had triggered a fire alarm near a toilet outside the LegCo building before they went back to the protest area to ignite a gas canister. What this suggests is that these people were not sure whether such a small fire could in itself attract public attention. 
A controlled blast that could not have injured anyone - this is still in the realm of typical Hong Kong-style conservative extremism. The offenders wanted to present themselves as dangerous, but their actions still seem all too harmless. However, sooner or later, one or more from the group will feel the need to be more violent. When they finally decide to do some real damage, they will most probably start with targeting someone seen as pro-establishment so they can justify what they do. 
From People's Liberation Army barrack break-ins to jeering at the national flag to the most recent bin blast, activism in Hong Kong is becoming more aggressive. What is even scarier is the permissive attitude of society. 
If these actions are generally condemned by the average Hong Kong person, then they are truly isolated incidents and nothing to be worried too much about. However, when society is ambiguous as to whether these actions are morally right or wrong, then we have a big problem. 
No one will deny that arson is a crime, but legality and morality are not the same thing. When someone commits a crime in the name of our core values, such as justice, freedom and democracy, many Hong Kong people seem to believe that person is therefore somehow less blameworthy. We have to be vigilant against this sort of reasoning. 
National Public Radio reported Dec 7 that "when a man wielding a knife stabbed three people at an East London subway stop on Saturday evening and shouted, 'This is for Syria' as he was being handcuffed an onlooker yelled, 'You ain't no Muslim, bruv!' using slang akin to 'bro'. 'You're no Muslim. You ain't no Muslim,' he repeated." The man who made the statement has not been identified, but the hashtag '#YouAintNoMuslimBruv' began trending worldwide, no doubt propelled by Muslims. 
The radicals set fire to the rubbish bin in opposition to the Copyright (Amendment) Bill now being debated in Hong Kong. They claim the bill is going to undermine our freedom of speech on the Internet. They also believe the central government is behind the bill. What they do not know is that copyright owners from the US are pushing harder than anyone else when it comes to tighter copyright protection on the Internet in Hong Kong. If these radicals insist on conducting criminal activities in the name of fighting against the central government, we must tell them, "You ain't no Hong Kong person, bro." 




(HK Edition 12/15/2015 page12)

