
Sunday's district council election ended with a record turnout of 1,468,000, or 47 percent of registered voters. The initial impression is that there are quite a number of new faces; some are from the so-called "post-Occupy umbrella" organizations which did well in the polls. On the other hand, many legislators who joined the race, irrespective of their political affiliations, were not so lucky. 
This is what this game is meant to be about: The district councils are for young people who are dedicated community workers; they are not for aging politicians. A lot of people still think otherwise. But they will ultimately fail. 
Community work is also politics, but of a different type. Old school political parties, be it the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong (DAB), the Democratic Party or the Labor Party all believe community work means giving out small gifts and fighting on behalf of the people. This kind of community work has worked well for them in the past. It enabled them to win seats in the district councils, and in turn helped their politicians to gain seats in the Legislative Council. The main battle is the LegCo election. The district council elections are really just minor skirmishes. 
After the dissidents vetoed the constitutional reform package this summer, they realized there was no chance to seize power in the SAR in the foreseeable future. So they changed their tactics to disrupting the governance of Hong Kong. This calls for a different brand of "community work". Instead of serving the people, they turn to agitating them and organizing them to fight for themselves. So it is an entirely different ball game. 



Instead of representative and indirect democracy, now our dissidents are bent on teaching the community "direct democracy". Theoretically, every decision large or small has to be passed by each and every member in the community. According to some people, minor decisions are also included; the new term for this is "deliberative democracy". 
If they succeed, and chances are they will to a certain extent, we will hear the cry for self-determination and self-government everywhere. Does this sound familiar? Yes, it has already taken over the campuses. Students - not student representatives - should have a say in the running of our universities, and their leaders dare not say no to this. 
The old - and I mean adult - world has been caught by surprise and is still dumbfounded. The only argument we can muster so far is we hold the purse strings and we will not allow it. Of course, young people will not tolerate this. They are experts in fighting against their parents - who also hold the purse strings - and winning. Mind you, young people have their rights and this is their entitlement. 
With some education from our dissidents - which they successfully offer to our young people - many ordinary people will soon realize they also have their rights and their entitlements. They can decide to fight for themselves without caring for society as a whole. As some dissident lawmakers frequently say their job is to raise hell - and it is up to the government to provide the necessary solutions. But when the government does come up with solutions, it is their job to reject them. 
"I want it all and I want it now" - this is called self-determination. Who can resist it? Not our university vice-chancellors and not our government officials. Soon, this new community spirit, as preached by some of our new district councilors, will spread all over Hong Kong. 
Their stated goals are self-determination after 2047. We will see this war cry appearing more frequently in the coming years. 

(HK Edition 11/24/2015 page4)

