
Chris Lonsdale says if the reform proposals are passed, Hong Kong will have the chance to experiment and see what will happen with direct CE elections 
When looking at the thorny problem of constitutional development in Hong Kong, and the upcoming vote on constitutional reform, what I see is a squabbling couple in the middle of a domestic dispute. Sadly, unless things change, this dispute is ultimately heading for divorce. Right now it is the sort of situation where every action by one party is designed to do harm to the other party. At the end of the day, the true victims are the children. 
As with every conflict of this sort, each side identifies the beginning of the conflict as some "evil" action taken by the other side. The "pan-democrats" quite clearly want to rain on the government's parade by vetoing the current proposals for universal suffrage. Why? Despite the rhetoric about "one person, one vote", I have a sneaking suspicion the real motivation comes in part from the fact that they were sidelined in 1997 when the Provisional Legislative Council was installed by the central government. In their mind, "it's Beijing's fault, and Beijing can't be trusted". 
Of course, the central government points the finger to the last British administration, especially Chris Patten, and the fact that "democratic changes" instituted in Hong Kong at that time were in violation of the Joint Declaration. So, they had no choice but to set up the Provisional LegCo! 
Of course, we could go back further. We could say it all started with the Tian'anmen incident. Or, maybe it was the "cultural revolution" (1966-76). Or, maybe earlier, the Opium Wars. It is really quite endless, and, ultimately, quite pointless. 
What we must understand is that, as with any dispute of this nature, there is no beginning! And, unless we choose otherwise, there is no end. The conflict is an on-going cycle, and blame is always apportioned by different people based on where in the cycle they choose to point! Simply trying to turn the clock back, or get revenge for historical "wrongs", just keeps the cycle going. Think Northern Ireland or the Middle East - endless cycles of blame and revenge. 
Unless, of course, we choose to break the cycle. So, how do we break this vicious and dangerous cycle in Hong Kong? Firstly, everybody needs to understand and accept that we are stuck in a negative spiral of conflict, and that the only way out is to break it. The failure to do so will lead to a fundamental breakdown of society in Hong Kong. Really, none of us want to be here when that happens. 
Secondly, we simply need to understand that constitutional development in Hong Kong is an experiment! This is so important that I am going to repeat myself. Constitutional development in Hong Kong is an experiment. In any experiment you have to try new initiatives and collect data to see what happened. Then, as needed, you change the experiment and try again until you get the results you want - in this case - the right balance acceptable to most of the major players. By nature an experiment cannot be perfect, but each experiment creates learning that edges closer to the final solution. Even some of the oldest democracies in the world continue to evolve with periodical constitutional amendments! 
Hong Kong has never had "one person, one vote". If the government proposal is passed in a couple of weeks, Hong Kong has the chance to experiment with "one person, one vote". Yes, the selection of candidates will be somewhat limited by the Nominating Committee (NC). But, is that really an insurmountable obstacle? I don't think so. 
What is really important is that, if the government proposals are passed, we will have the chance to experiment and see what actually happens with direct CE elections in Hong Kong. One of the outcomes is that we will find out Hong Kong people's views of the new arrangement. For instance, if people truly object to the way the candidates are selected in 2017 they can vote with their beds - i.e. sleep late and not vote! I think that a 100 percent no-show by all voters would send a very strong message. 
Or, voters could do write-ins. Some 80 percent "inadmissible" votes caused by "write-ins" is also a very strong message. It is a secret ballot, so you can't stop it and you can't punish the perpetrators. 
Of course, those outcomes are unlikely. Fundamentally, the people of Hong Kong understand that, in order to have a good CE, certain criteria must be met. Whoever gets the job needs to be able to pull different parts of Hong Kong society together to build a meaningful consensus. Secondly, he or she needs to make the livelihood of the people, and meaningful development of the SAR their top priorities. And thirdly, he or she must be able to have meaningful communication with the mainland and various political factions. 
If the NC does its job, voters will be faced with choices of candidates who have these qualities. And if the NC does not do a good job, the voters can always stay at home. Let's find out. Let's just do the experiment! 




(HK Edition 06/12/2015 page11)

