
Lau Kong-wah and Cheung Wan-ching appointed as new policy secretaries 
The departure of two policy secretaries on Tuesday would not affect the stability of the leadership team as the accountability system was designed to handle such changes, Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying explained as he announced the top-level reshuffle in the government. 
Incumbent Under Secretary for Constitutional and Mainland Affairs Lau Kong-wah was named to succeed Tsang Tak-sing as secretary for home affairs. Outgoing Secretary for the Civil Service Paul Tang Kwok-wai will be replaced by Commissioner of Customs and Excise Clement Cheung Wan-ching. 
Both appointments took effect immediately on Tuesday after securing approval by the State Council. Leung, who made the announcement at a press briefing, said the accountability system established in 2002 was designed to allow individuals enter and exit Hong Kong's top political team "with relative ease". 
Although a number of politically appointed officials have made use of the "revolving door" mechanism over the past three years, Leung stressed his cabinet has remained very stable, especially when compared with other democracies. Some politically appointed officials who previously resigned before the end of their terms had done so for different reasons, he explained. 
Chief Secretary for Administration Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor said it was regrettable that the two veteran officials were leaving the team. But she stressed that senior government officials have always worked as a team, and said she felt confident about this continuing. 
Tsang, 66, had been the oldest member of the team. In a brief statement, Tsang said "now I am glad to retire". He was the first political official since 2002 to cite "retirement" as a reason to leave early before the end of his term, although there is no default retirement age for politically appointed officials. 
The former news editor was recruited in 1998 by the city's first chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa, as a full time advisor at the Central Policy Unit. In 2007, he was appointed by Donald Tsang Yam-kuen to head the Home Affairs Bureau. He also served as a deputy to the National People's Congress between 1990 and 2007. 
His older brother, Legislative Council President Jasper Tsang Yok-sing, said the news was a surprise, but he said his brother had lamented - "and not only once" - about being the oldest member of the team. 
Tsang's successor, Lau Kong-wah, became a member of the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong (DAB) and a legislator in 1998. He lost a bid to be re-elected to the LegCo in 2012. But Lau was hired by the government as an under secretary three months later. 
Leung heralded Lau for his hands-on experience at the frontline of the community. The Home Affairs Bureau oversees resource allocation at district councils, but Leung made clear that the appointment of a core DAB member to run the bureau had nothing to do with the two upcoming elections. 
Paul Tang's exit drew less attention on Tuesday. In a statement, he called the juncture an "opportune time" to step down. He said this was due to "unforeseeable family circumstances which require me to spend more time with my family members". But Tang said he was still prepared to serve the community "in another capacity". 
Hopes are high for the new head of civil service. Hong Kong Chinese Civil Servants' Association Vice-President Li Kwai-yin urged the new Civil Service Secretary, Clement Cheung, to improve communications and partnerships with unions. 
Cheung joined the administrative service in 1983 and had worked in various departments and bureaus before landing the customs job in 2011. 
kahon@chinadailyhk.com 







 
Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying speaks to the press after announcing a reshuffle of his leadership team at the Office of the Chief Executive, Tamar, on Tuesday. Roy Liu / China Daily






(HK Edition 07/22/2015 page7)

