
Wednesday's Legislative Council debate on the motion to thank Chief Executive (CE) Leung Chun-ying for his 2015 Policy Address has shed new light on the true colors of some of the most vocal "pan-democrats". 
Labour Party lawmaker Lee Cheuk-yan accused the CE of "sacrificing" the "One Country, Two Systems" policy and Hong Kong's high degree of autonomy with his latest policy speech. Apparently the only proof of his guilt is the fact that Leung warned, in the foreword of his Policy Address, against the dangerous ideas of "Hong Kong Independence" frequently floated by Undergrad, the official magazine of the Students' Union of the University of Hong Kong. 
Civic Party legislator Alan Leong Kah-kit also took the opportunity to attack the CE. He accused the CE of "betraying Hong Kong for personal gain" by openly criticizing Undergrad for what it has been advocating. 
The fact is, as top administrator of the HKSAR, the CE has rightly warned the community against the potential harm "HK independence" advocacy could cause the SAR. 
It is widely accepted that the "One Country, Two Systems" principle, ever since it was conceived more than 30 years ago, has never included any element allowing for the notion of the city of Hong Kong as an independent political entity. Moreover, even by the wildest possible interpretation of the most liberal political scholar in the world, a "high degree of autonomy" doesn't legitimately contain the slightest implication of such a political proposition. 
Leong, the Civic Party leader, has been strenuously evasive about his stance on the idea of "HK independence" when pressed for an answer on this. He and his radical opposition camp peers have tactfully distanced themselves from the "HK independence" fire pot to "save their own skins". But Leong has inadvertently "betrayed" himself by speaking up for Undergrad - specifically for its separatist advocacy. 
The perverse logic demonstrated by the two opposition leaders in their latest attack on the CE has barely done themselves any favors in terms of political gains. Rather, it exposed their otherwise covert political maneuvers of encouraging the spread and popularization of separatist thoughts in the SAR by pampering radical young people in the city. 
At a time when the opposition camp is dominated by political radicals strongly supportive of separatist ideas, the odds are thin for Hong Kong to complete its new round of constitutional reforms to further advance democracy. Whether or not they are sincere in promoting democracy in the city, the "pan-democrats" won't go anywhere without first breaking rank with their radical partners. 




(HK Edition 02/12/2015 page10)

