


      Chief Executive (CE) Leung Chun-ying has been criticized by academics for interfering in academic freedom. This was after he discussed, in his recent Policy Address, the cover story entitled "Hong Kong people deciding their own fate" in the February 2014 issue of Hong Kong University Students' Union's official magazine Undergrad. Leung also expressed concern with an earlier publication, a book entitled Hong Kong Nationalism.
      
        When I read through his Policy Address, the CE made three comments in relation to the article and the book. First, Leung said some facts (in the publications) have been misstated; second, he said people must stay alert; and third, he asked political figures with close ties to leaders of the student movement to advise them against putting forward such fallacies - referring to the publications' advocacy that "Hong Kong should find a way toward self-reliance and self-determination".
        
          Leung's comments were no more than 90 words or less than 1 percent of his Policy Address and yet it has stirred up a tremendous amount of anger among students, academics, commentators and "pan-democratic" legislators. They alleged the CE should not infringe on academic freedom. Their reactions far outstripped any comments on more significant issues confronting Hong Kong citizens as a whole - since what the CE has delivered was a wide-ranging Policy Address covering many issues that Hong Kong needs to deal with, including "upholding the rule of law, seizing opportunities, making the right choices, pursuing democracy, boosting the economy and improving people's livelihood".
          
            If people are so concerned about the future of Hong Kong, why are they focusing on some unrealistic propositions that the majority of Hong Kong's citizens would either recognize as follies or reject them as fantasies? Were the CE's comments really an "attack on academic freedom" and "white terror"?
            
              Let's examine the concept of "academic freedom" more closely first. In the United Kingdom, the concept of academic freedom tends to be associated with a number of values which include "freedom from state and political interference". In this case, the CE was simply asking people to "stay alert" and urging "political leaders" to play their roles in sharing his concerns with students.
              
                Has anyone been disciplined, dismissed or suffered detriment as result of the CE's comments? Despite this the allegation of political interference still sticks, but no one even gets a telephone call or an e-mail as a result. The CE was simply making a statement of fact.
                
                  So where's the infringement and interference?
                  
                    In the UK, like most Western democratic nations, the government recognizes it does have a role to play in relation to academic freedom and free speech but there are also legal requirements that needed to be imposed on universities as well as other public and public organizations in relation to the exercise of this freedom. Like everything else, there are "rights" and "responsibilities". As far as academics and students are concerned, they should not take freedom for granted and ignore their responsibilities to society.
                    
                      Challenges confronting the British government on a daily basis ranged from a diverse student population in its universities to internal security, equality issues to international political differences and conflicts due to religious beliefs. The prime minister and leaders of all political parties have always encouraged British citizens to be inclusive, respectful and to subscribe to British values. These pronouncements by political leaders were not attempting to limit freedom but to promote it for all.
                      
                        Academic freedom is not limitless and without boundaries. It is a pity that academics and university students in Hong Kong fail to understand their responsibilities and the limitations of their academic freedom. In their so-called pursuit of "academic freedom", they forgot that they do have responsibilities as citizens toward the "One Country, Two Systems" policy and the Basic Law that established the SAR.
                        
                          Freedom of speech or free speech, on the other hand, is essential in an open, democratic society. In Britain, freedom of speech is widely respected and tolerated. However, like everything else, there are times when limits have to be introduced. For example, when someone makes a hate speech that incites violence, there is a need to curtail their freedom. The law is there to ensure that there is right balance between freedom of expression and the use, or abuse, of that freedom in a way that harms society.
                          
                            Even the Pope, on a recent visit in Asia, said there are limits to freedom of expression. He was referring to the Charlie Hebdo attack in Paris. He was cautioning against doing things which will provoke people. The Pope also said the right to liberty of expression came with the obligation to speak for "the common good".
                            
                              Contrary to the criticisms leveled onto him, the CE has on record in his policy statement asserted that he "recognizes the aspirations of young students for democracy and concerns about political reforms". He also acknowledged that young people are the "future pillars of society and deserve care". He was speaking for the common good. His concerns with the Undergrad article and book are valid and merits being in his Policy Address.
                              
                                The promotion of Hong Kong nationalism by university students, even as an option for the future, is regrettable. We all went through our adolescence and youth at one time in our lives and no doubt went through the same "anti"-everything stage ourselves. We cannot afford to make Hong Kong's political, economic and social future an "option" to generate further debate. We must make references to current political and legal realities in the SAR.
                                
                                  In order to avoid this freedom being misused or abused again, the enactment of Article 23 of the Basic Law is necessary.
                                  
                                    The author is director of the Chinese in Britain Forum. He was the first-ever Chinese British citizen to be elected mayor of the Greater London Borough of Redbridge (2009-10) and served as a member of the city council for over 10 years.
                                    
(HK Edition 02/13/2015 page10)

