
The New People's Party on Tuesday published the results of a public opinion poll. This poll suggested that the ratio of those who support to those who oppose the SAR government's constitutional reform package currently stands at 3 to 1. 
This is further proof that the great majority of Hong Kong residents want universal suffrage in the 2017 Chief Executive election as prescribed under the Basic Law. 
This is an undeniable fact that more Hong Kong residents support the implementation of universal suffrage in the 2017 CE election according to the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC), than those who oppose it - no matter which opinion poll one refers to. 
No doubt the opposition camp knows this only too well. But why does it refuse to heed the overwhelming wishes of the public? Many people cannot understand why the "pan-democrat" parties are determined to shatter this popular "dream" of Hong Kong or what democracy means to these "democrats". Indeed they owe the public many answers, not least concerning how they can call themselves "democrats" without respecting the popular will. 
Conventional wisdom has it that political parties come and go. Those which have managed to stay strong must have done something right. Granted, political parties are new to Hong Kong. However, one only needs to look at which parties split up soon after they were founded to see what makes or breaks a political organization. Hong Kong may not have full democracy yet, but democracy is undoubtedly at work in Hong Kong. Without popular support no political party can stay long enough to see the realization of its ultimate goals. 
Currently the 27 "pan-democrat" Legislative Council members seem determined to block the SAR government's electoral reform proposals because the proposals comply with the Basic Law and NPCSC decisions. They may represent the will of the decision-making cores of their parties, but they probably do not represent the majority of party members. If the leadership of the opposition parties truly aspires to seeing their parties endure, the last thing they should do is ignore the wishes of the public. 
On a vital issue such as the constitutional development of Hong Kong, consensus is everything. Since the public generally supports the SAR government's efforts to achieve universal suffrage according to the Basic Law and NPCSC decisions, the ultimate question facing the "pan-democrat" parties is whether they believe in true democracy. Right now at least their decision-making cores appear determined to deny 5 million local voters the opportunity to elect the next CE by "one person, one vote". This might be the last nail in their parties' coffins. 




(HK Edition 05/27/2015 page11)

