


      Polarizing politics has appeared to take center stage in the Legislative Council over the past year, but the heads of its House Committee said they saw improvements in their working relationship with the executive branch.
      
        The House Committee meets every Friday afternoon to prepare for LegCo meetings. It then considers matters relating to LegCo business, including scrutinizing bills and subsidiary legislation tabled for approval.
        
          Committee Chairman Andrew Leung Kwan-yuen, at the review press conference a year ago, expressed concern about great tension between the legislature and the administration.
          
            He said on Tuesday that there have been no great improvements in the past year, but the executive branch has made more efforts to coordinate and streamline the workflow.
            
              One example, which he gave at the review for the 2014-15 legislative session, was procedural and fees rules for the Competition Tribunal. While the rules were enacted by negative vetting, the judiciary sought comments from LegCo before the rules were gazetted. Leung said this had made later meetings more efficient.
              
                Chief Secretary for Administration Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor, who meets Leung and Deputy Chairman Ronny Tong Ka-wah every week, was credited with the improvements in the working relationship.
                
                  But the legislative-executive relationship is far from amicable. The Finance Committee only cleared two funding requests after four hours of meeting on Tuesday, as certain opposition lawmakers again resorted to filibuster tactics to derail the proposal to establish the Innovation and Technology Bureau.
                  
                    Leung urged the opposition to work with all sides on people's livelihoods and economic development before the end of LegCo's current term in July 2016.
                    
                      The House Committee is set to get a new deputy chairman. Both Leung and Ip Kwok-him, a member from the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong, stressed the need to look for Tong's successor from within the opposition camp. This is in order to maintain a bridge across the political divide.
                      
                        Tong will vacate his LegCo office by the end of September. The senior counsel will resume full-time work and develop his new think tank Path of Democracy.
                        
                          kahon@chinadailyhk.com
                          (HK Edition 07/15/2015 page7)

