
A year after 'Occupy Central' began, the damage done by the illegal campaign still haunts Hong Kong. Shadow Li and Luis Liu ask business leaders, professionals and academics how the city can recover and what lessons can be learned from the failed occupation. 



A year after the illegal 79-day "Occupy Central" campaign, Hong Kong is still suffering from its aftermath economically and will continue to suffer from it, said lawmaker Vincent Fang Kang, who represents the wholesale and retail sector. 
The veteran entrepreneur in the garment industry - who has lasting memories of the SARS crisis in 2003 - expressed growing concerns about the gloomy outlook for Hong Kong's economy, despite the massive occupation having ended about nine months ago. 
"There will be a wave of winding-ups among micro-enterprises in six months, if things continue to slip like this," Fang said. 
Normally the busy season for the retail, travel and catering industries starts in October and ends around March. Fang said when the slack season begins, businesses might not break even due to an "Occupy" domino effect along with soaring rents and labor costs. 
The dismal economy has started to worry the government and leaders of its pillar industries. The government has announced another one-off fund of HK$10 million for tourism attractions to strengthen Hong Kong's profile overseas. This was after the government's earlier injection of HK$80 million for the Hong Kong Tourism Board. 
But against all the odds, the opposition camp and activist groups still managed to "celebrate" the one-year anniversary of the illegal protests. 
"It is absurd that they even celebrated the illegal behavior," Fang said. 
Fang believed that "Occupy" was just an outcome triggered by the long-standing uncooperative movements inside the city's legislature. From there, it has opened a door to all kinds of activism. This includes the constant anti-parallel trader protests which ended up harassing innocent tourists. 
"The opposition camp has set a bad example to the public in the Legislative Council by acting unreasonably, including throwing objects at authority figures whenever they want, and calling each other names," Fang said. 
With the district council and LegCo elections coming up, the radical behavior would not cease but continue to grow to try to win the support of radical voters, he said. 
But Hong Kong had to put a halt to such behavior as the city was facing a challenge worse than SARS, the business leader argued. 
Hong Kong is not the only victim of the downturn in the global economy. Its peers, Singapore and South Korea, are also hurting. But Hong Kong seemed to be exhibiting the worst symptoms, Fang said. He believed that internal strife caused by a divided society following the illegal occupation was a key reason for the ailing economy. 
To get through the tough post-"Occupy" period, Fang suggested the government be bold and start to use its "rainy day" surplus. For short-term measures, the lawmaker - who advocates free market measures - believed the government should lift the ban on baby formula milk powder as a friendly gesture to mainland shoppers. 
In the long term, Fang said the city needs new attractions, such as its offshore islands. The business sector would be extremely keen to develop such attractions - but only after the government came up with supporting facilities, such as ferry arrangements. 



'Occupy Central" wrongly encouraged young people in Hong Kong to believe it was acceptable to express their demands by resorting to violence, said Honorary President of the Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong Kong Milano Choy Tak-ho. 
The end of the 79-day illegal occupation did not stop activism in the city. The activists seemed to be inspired by the massive occupation. They then turned to guerrilla-style protests by constantly harassing visitors in major shopping areas like Mong Kok. 
Choy believed that the radical protests against parallel traders - which degenerated into kicking the suitcases of random mainland visitors - and students' storming of a University of Hong Kong Council meeting were all miniature versions of "Occupy". 
This is the biggest disaster that "Occupy" has brought to Hong Kong, Choy said. But the former member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference National Committee said he was worried that a second round of major unrest would occur, as residual forces of "Occupy" still remained. 
"The masterminds and participants of 'Occupy' are still free from the penalties they deserve for breaking the law," said Choy. 
During the occupation, the protesters blocked traffic at major thoroughfares, besieged the government headquarters, challenged the police, and defied the courts. This severely disrupted the rule of law in the city, he added. 
But most of them got away with what they did because they joined illegal activities in the name of democracy, said Choy. 
The business leader, who has witnessed the city thrive and expand from a small port to an international business center, expressed concerns over the possibility of more unrest which could hurt Hong Kong's international image. 
The massive occupation had greatly undermined the city's business vitality, Choy said. 
But the veteran businessman said it is now a good time for Hong Kong to move forward - particularly after President Xi Jinping reached consensus with the United States during his visit to the country. 
Choy said Xi's visit could be a significant boost to Hong Kong's stagnant economy. Moreover, the US has promised not to interfere in Hong Kong's affairs. 
That means Hong Kong's political ecosystem will improve. This will reduce hindrances to the SAR government in developing the city's economy and people's livelihoods, Choy added. 
The latest Global Competitiveness Report published by the World Economic Forum shows that Hong Kong has slipped from top place to third in terms of the financial industry's competitiveness. 
Choy believed that Hong Kong should seize opportunities arising from the yuan's internationalization by acting as a "super agent". This will strengthen Hong Kong's status as a world financial center. 
The key is to stop political strife and focus on economic development, the businessman advised. 



The only opportunity for Hong Kong to take a step forward in its electoral reform lies in ordinary people's decisions - by casting their vote to bring lawmakers who support reform into the Legislative Council, Albert Chen Hung-yee, Hong Kong SAR Basic Law Committee member and former dean of the University of Hong Kong's Faculty of Law, told China Daily. 
Chen said various polls had shown that the majority of Hong Kong residents supported passing the electoral reform package proposed by the Hong Kong SAR Government. The package had been based on the decision of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress on issues relating to selection of the Chief Executive, which was passed on Aug 31 last year. 
Thus there is a chance for more people from the silent majority to come out and vote out those who opposed Hong Kong's political development, Chen said. 
However, he felt the change might not happen in the coming LegCo election next year. 
The "Occupy Central" movement showed that Hong Kong people's views are divided on whether to gradually launch Hong Kong's own system of democracy under the central government's decision or adopt a Western-style system in a one-off move, Chen said. 
One year after "Occupy" began, the political environment has recovered. It is now more or less the same as it was before the illegal protests, Chen said. But he thought moderate "pan-democrats" would have a better chance in the coming elections. 
In 2012 LegCo election, 55 percent of the electorate voted for the "pan-democratic" camp, with only one moderate - Ronny Tong Ka-wah, elected. Although Tong resigned after the electoral reform plan was vetoed, Chen expects one to two, or even more, moderates will be elected in 2016. 
Filibustering in the legislature is one of the most urgent issues to be tackled, he said. Chen hoped the LegCo president can exercise his power over it or amend the rules of procedure. 
He also hoped that under the current system, political parties, especially moderate "pan-democrats", and the government can cooperate and communicate more. 



Massive protests like "Occupy Central" exposed Hong Kong to infiltration by foreign forces because the city has not yet enacted legislation in accordance with Article 23 of the Basic Law to protect national security, Executive Council Chairman of the China-Australia Legal Exchange Foundation Lawrence Ma Yan-kwok said. 
In these situations, foreign forces could penetrate Hong Kong by funding activists to join the protests to overthrow the government, the barrister said. 
In Ma's opinion, mass participation has provided a guise for protesters and helped them pursue an extreme political agenda. 
The massive number of lawbreakers has stopped police from prosecuting them. This was because it was hard getting evidence on everyone involved. Even surveillance cameras could not film all the wrongdoers, Ma noted. 
A year after the illegal occupation, which came at great cost to the city, there have been inadequate legal consequences for protesters and their leaders. That has shown a negative side to the rule of law in the city. This would give people the false impression that protesters could use illegal means to attain their objectives, said Ma. 
There were two aspects to the definition of the rule of law: firstly, a preventive aspect that prevents wrongs or crimes from being committed; and secondly, a punitive aspect that introduces sanctions backed by law. 
Ma said that during the occupation, the preventive aspect of the rule of law was considerably damaged. 
During the more than two month-long occupation, there were religious leaders openly supporting it, he noted. 
There were also several renowned legal practitioners who said the occupation was "civil disobedience". Many academics had also backed it, he said. 
This had all helped encourage many protesters to become divorced from reality, Ma said. 
He believes public education is needed to rectify this. The opposition camp's propaganda could be countered through open speeches and public debates. 
Earlier, top advisers and officials from the central government also voiced their concerns about Hong Kong. But their attempts to clear the way for political discussion were quoted out of context and distorted by the opposition. 
The opposition had again tried to confuse the public by misrepresenting the message from Beijing, Ma said. 
He urged the pro-establishment camp to stop relying on academics and advisers on the mainland to resolve problems caused by "Occupy". 
Ma suggested the pro-establishment camp train more professionals with overseas backgrounds who love Hong Kong and the country. This is to stop the lies the opposition camp has been telling Hong Kong people. 



The "Occupy Central" movement, which violated both Hong Kong's local laws and its constitutional document the Basic Law, jeopardized the city's law and order, according to Song Sio-chong, professor at the Research Center of Hong Kong and Macao Basic Law, Shenzhen University and member of the Chinese Association of Hong Kong and Macao Studies. 
The objective of the movement was in breach of the Basic Law - in which resides the ultimate power to decide on electoral arrangements, not to mention other local laws. Thus, Song said, it damaged one of Hong Kong's core values - the rule of law. 
It also disrupted people's lives and business activities, he added. This explains why many local people who supported electoral reform abandoned the occupiers, Song said. The movement ultimately died due to declining support. 
He said that among the underlying causes of the protests, the most worrying was the absence of education on the nation and the Basic Law. This had resulted in young people's resistance to the central government's authority, he added. 
Chinese history courses should become obligatory in Hong Kong schools, Song said. Ignorance of the nation explained the younger generation's lack of a national identity. 
During the post-handover period, both the central and Hong Kong governments failed to promote the obligations that the city's people should carry out based on the Basic Law, Song said. Instead, they mainly focused on the rights Hong Kong people enjoy. 
Song said this low-key attitude, adopted to guarantee a "smooth handover" of the city, made some people wrongly comprehend the relationship between Beijing and Hong Kong under the "One Country, Two Systems" principle. 
After the movement, radicals could attract more votes in local elections as this year 40 percent of the newly registered voters are youngsters. 
According to election statistics, radical political parties won more than 17 percent of votes in the Legislative Council election in 2012. This was when social sentiment against the mainland started to grow. Back in 2004, the ratio was only 7 percent. 
He further predicted that radicals might win 20 percent of the votes in the coming LegCo election. This posed a serious threat to Hong Kong society, Song warned. 
"Occupy" would not change the central government's policy on Hong Kong. But he said the city might lose its position in the national development strategy if it keeps struggling in its relationship with Beijing. 
"Not only will Hong Kong's financial center status be challenged by Shanghai, but the city's role in the 'Belt and Road' initiative might also face uncertainty," Song said. 
(HK Edition 10/05/2015 page7)

