
Rao Geping, a member of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Basic Law Committee of the National People's Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) and professor at the Law School of Peking University, said Saturday at a symposium on the birth, implementation and future of the Basic Law that the democratic rights of Hong Kong residents are guaranteed by the Basic Law, which is based on the country's Constitution. 
Those rights, he said, were not available under the colonial rule. Neither were they given by the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights, which cannot override Hong Kong law. 
The opposition camp in Hong Kong has insisted that the implementation of universal suffrage must comply with "international standards", which are spelled out in the above-mentioned international convention. But it has failed to mention the fact that the convention is not legally binding in Hong Kong, or anywhere else in the world for that matter. The reason why the opposition parties refuse to acknowledge this fact is quite simple: They do not stand a chance of entering democratic elections by universal suffrage according to the Basic Law and the only way for them to seize Hong Kong's governing power "democratically" is to render the Basic Law irrelevant by any means necessary, including making up "international standards". 
Hong Kong is an inseparable part of China's territory. Its prosperity and stability rely on the rule of law, which is protected by the Basic Law and the nation's Constitution. The implementation of universal suffrage in Hong Kong must follow the Basic Law and relevant decisions of the NPCSC, which exercises the right to provide ultimate interpretation of the Basic Law when necessary. This is the constitutional reality of Hong Kong and no one can change or deny it. Those who attempt to change it can never succeed because 1.4 billion Chinese people, including 7 million Hong Kong residents, will not let them. 
The central government has always supported Hong Kong's constitutional development according to the Basic Law and relevant NPCSC decisions and will do so in the future. It is to the best interest of Hong Kong society and national interest of the People's Republic China, of which Hong Kong is a special administrative region. Without the motherland Hong Kong has no future and that is a given, which is why all Hong Kong residents are obligated to support the lawful administration of the SAR government in accordance to the Basic Law. 
Ensuring Hong Kong's prosperity and stability is a matter of China's sovereignty. And its success depends on fully implementing the Basic Law, without which Hong Kong could not have achieved so much in the past 17 years. All those "Hong Kong independence"advocates had better abandon their delusion for good, because they will fail miserably if they try. 




(HK Edition 04/13/2015 page10)

