
Hong Kong's deep-rooted social and economic problems, aggravated by political bickering over the past few years, have given rise to concerns about a lasting decline of the "Pearl of the Orient". It has also raised some pressing questions - What or who are to blame, and what can be done to rectify the situation? 
Many people have blamed external factors, including changes in international trade, regional developments, growing competition from Hong Kong's economic rivals, and recurring financial and economic crises - both regional and global. But the success story of Singapore - a favorite comparison for Hong Kong - has rendered such theories unconvincing. 
Being a small open economy like Hong Kong, Singapore has been influenced by no fewer external factors. But unlike Hong Kong, which has, without fail, received strong support from the Chinese mainland whenever the city faces a huge challenge or crisis, Singapore has had to deal with its hardships on its own. Yet, the Lion City's economic and social development has advanced significantly over the past decade, overtaking Hong Kong in many key aspects, including gross domestic product (GDP), per capita GDP and income, as well as the overall happiness of residents. 
Obviously, social and economic development is driven, or obstructed, by both external and domestic factors, with the latter being the determining factor. 
Many Hong Kong people have rightly noted the city's persistent internal squabbles. But it has yet to be realized or admitted by all Hong Kong people that the root cause of the political wrangling lies in the refusal of some sectors of the community to honor the true intent of the "One Country, Two Systems" policy. These people have deliberately misinterpreted the Basic Law for the own political pursuits, including their attempt to promote Hong Kong as an independent political entity. They have been obstructing in every possible way the city's decolonization process. Worse, they have tried to revive de-Sinofication which was initiated by the colonialists in the 1980s. 
Confronted with tremendous challenges arising from social and economic problems, many people have pinned their hopes on universal suffrage. But democracy is no panacea, as proved by the widespread dysfunction of democratic systems worldwide. The fundamental solution to Hong Kong's problems lies in the correct interpretation of "One Country, Two Systems". Only by interpreting this policy correctly, and handling its relationship with the mainland appropriately, can the Hong Kong SAR tackle its political conflicts effectively and overcome them with a concerted effort. 




(HK Edition 09/21/2015 page9)

