
Ho Lok-Sang argues that glorifying the 'Occupy Central' movement student leader who undermined the cause of democracy is nonsensical 
Fortune Magazine named Joshua Wong, student leader in the "Occupy Central" movement, as among the world's top 10 greatest leaders. While Wong is eloquent, articulate, and has charmed many, I would not call him nearly a "great leader." A great leader is not only someone who can lead, but someone who can lead to something good for the world. 
Unfortunately for Hong Kong, Wong has used his leadership skills in ways that ended up hurting Hong Kong and the world. His arrogance and betrayal of the spirit of democracy in favor of "formal democracy", i.e., such matters as the apparent fairness of the nomination or voting procedures. It was this arrogance and disregard for substantive justice and the basic rights of others that led to the self-justified obstruction of the thoroughfares of the city. The 79 days of obstruction of some key road sections and junctions of Hong Kong and Kowloon - in Admiralty, Causeway Bay, and Mong Kok, imposed huge losses on many small businesses, huge inconvenience to tens of thousands of Hong Kong people. In the end, over 1.8 million people signed in protest to the "Occupy" movement and demanded "the return of the roads to citizens." To call Wong's role in the leadership of this anti-social movement "great" is to share his self-righteousness and his disregard of the basic rights of others. 
In truth, Wong's acts really undermined rather than promoted the cause of democracy. I cannot comment on his motives, which could be noble, but he has led the world, including the editors of Fortune Magazine, to believe that violating the rights of others in the name of democracy can be justified. Someone who makes a personal sacrifice for some noble cause will earn my respect. But someone who imposes sacrifices on others for whatever cause one thinks is noble cannot earn my applause. The danger is that Wong has won many converts, and even the editors of Fortune Magazine touted him as a great leader. This is going to give ruthless self-righteous people the green light to harm others in the name of some "noble" goal. The world has already too many people who think like this. If we care about the future of humanity we really should not glorify anti-social acts. 
Too many people in the West think that anything other than "formal democracy" the way the West has defined it cannot be democracy. But exactly this formal democracy has disillusioned people from Latin America to Nepal and the Philippines in Asia to Eastern Europe. People in these countries ask: "We have our votes, but where are our rights?" Fortune Magazine has, regrettably, touted Wong as a hero, notwithstanding the fact that he and his followers were trampling on the rights of others. 
Mexico had "democracy", but 43 students were killed last year, and officials were implicated. The Philippines had "democracy," but in 2009 58 people were kidnapped and killed while on the way to file a certificate of candidacy in the forthcoming Maguindanao gubernatorial election. Afghanistan had "democracy", but Oxfam reports: "Afghanistan remains one of the most dangerous places to be a woman. 87 percent of Afghan women have experienced some form of violence, and the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission reports that nearly 15 percent of honour killings and sexual assaults carried out against women in the last two years were by the police." Hungary had democracy, but John McCain, Republican senator and former presidential candidate had this to say: "Democracy without respect for rule of law, separation of powers, and the protection of economic, civil, and religious liberties is not only inadequate, it is dangerous. It brings with it the erosion of liberty, the abuse of power, ethnic divisions, and economic restrictions - all of which we have witnessed in Hungary since Prime Minister Orban took power." 
If Wong had any regard for other people's rights, he would not have blocked Hong Kong's roads against the wishes of many. Wong and his followers wanted to undo the Basic Law, which explicitly stipulates that nomination of the candidates for the Chief Executive post has to be by the Nominating Committee (NC). The Basic Law was enacted after lengthy consultation and negotiation. Article 45 had that provision for some purpose, which obviously is to allay Beijing's worries for electing someone who would oppose its rule. Without this provision about the NC Beijing may not have agreed to pass it into law. If we had any sense of procedural justice, we would not overturn the provisions at will 25 years after its enactment. 
I often hear from "pan-democrats" that they fear the NC would effectively block candidates holding a different political view. My question has always been:"What different political view are we talking about?" If the different view is about how better to manage Hong Kong's housing, transportation, or environmental problems, why would the NC block anyone? If the "different political view" is about whether the Communist Party of China should rule over China including Hong Kong, that would be another matter. Of course, Beijing has every reason to block these people from running for office. 




(HK Edition 03/30/2015 page11)

