Professor Mark Kielsgard of the City University of Hong Kong Law School, speaking at a political reform forum last weekend, discussed two provisions of the Basic Law under Article 45 incongruent. One of these noted that the ultimate aim of political reform is "the selection of the Chief Executive by universal suffrage". Other provisions explain restrictions on nomination procedures through a Nominating Committee (NC). He says universal suffrage should be in the spirit of equal rights for nomination and for voting, as defined under Article 21 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The NC set-up and procedures undermine the spirit of universal suffrage.
Having said this, he acknowledges that restrictive provisions could be justified if there were a "compelling government interest". Kielsgard is making rational points. National security is clearly a "compelling government interest". Beijing officials have explained that concerns over national security are an important justification for using a NC. 
To critics, national security is not an issue. Why should national security be threatened through a certain nomination and election process? Events over the last year justify the central government's cautious policy. Beijing now believes Hong Kong is not ready for universal suffrage without the vetting of candidates.
The Basic Law was adopted in 1990 by the Seventh National People's Congress after a lengthy consultation process. It is based on the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration and the national Constitution. The Basic Law assures Hong Kong people that the Hong Kong SAR enjoys special status under the "One Country, Two Systems" framework, enjoying an independent legal system in the common law tradition, freedom from the necessity to pay the central government for defense, and having its own monetary system. The Basic Law legislates for a balance of many different considerations and input from different stakeholders. The specific provision of a NC was included in order to allay Beijing's fears over national security risks. 



During the recess, I talked with Kielsgard. He said prescreening through the NC was unacceptable because it gave voters no real choice, as candidates with alternative political views would be excluded. I asked him why Beijing would exclude candidates on the grounds of holding specific views on matters such as housing, health, or transport. It then became apparent to me that "candidates with alternative political views" are candidates who challenge the legitimacy of the central government. If so, Beijing would naturally want such candidates excluded. No wonder Beijing sees candidates who challenge the legitimacy of its rule as a threat to national security. 
To those who believe in party rotation, replacing the Communist Party of China (CPC) by some other party would not constitute a threat to national security. In many Western countries, no party has monopoly over political power, and that is why they are called democracies. However, the mainland subscribes to a totally different system: The ruling party stands for the interests of the people of the nation. There is no party rotation, but there is rotation of leadership. 
To state that the party stands for the interests of the people of the nation doesn't mean the policy decisions of the party are always in the interests of the people. The party could make bad decisions for two reasons: The party machinery may be under the control of self-interested individuals who do not really care about the welfare of the people; it may also be under the control of a leadership with good intentions but poor judgment.
Presently, President Xi Jinping is trying hard to establish effective governance within the Party so that power abuse can be curbed. China's consultative democracy which involves consultation with experts and stakeholders minimizes policy mistakes. On the other hand, if party rotation were introduced on the mainland, "pork barrel" politics and outright corruption could become prevalent. Partisan interests could trump the national interest. 
So far China's overall performance in economic and social policy areas compares favorably with that of any other country. China has vastly expanded the education opportunities of its people. It has increased spending on healthcare tremendously over the last few years. It has improved the accountability of its officials and respect for the rule of law. The ongoing reforms will make the government still more responsive to the needs and aspirations of the people.
The "Occupy Central" campaign shows that many Hong Kong people still do not accept the rule of the CPC. Senior Counsel Paul Shieh, former chairman of the Hong Kong Bar Association, in a recent press interview defended "Occupy" by saying that NPCSC interpretation of the Basic Law is rule by law and not really the rule of law. "If those in power use the law to pressure us into submission, we need to stand firm and resist." But does China not have sovereignty over Hong Kong? Shouldn't the central government have the right to exclude CE candidates that will not accept Beijing's rule?
(HK Edition 02/17/2015 page10)
