
Public opinion to persuade opposition 
The Alliance for Peace and Democracy on Thursday announced a five-day campaign, starting Friday, to encourage Hong Kong citizens to voice their opinions on political reform before March 7 when the public consultation period ends. In response to opposition lawmakers' non-cooperation movement in the Legislative Council (LegCo), alliance spokesman Robert Chow Yung said he would let the opinions of the public persuade opposition lawmakers. Chow said the genuine universal suffrage demanded by opposition lawmakers was not universal suffrage. The group plans to encourage people through multiple platforms, including political reform leaflet distribution, and social media promotions through Whatsapp, WeChat and Facebook. 
Ip conned by online scam 
The former secretary for security has been swindled out of half a million dollars after opening suspicious emails. Former government official and lawmaker Regina Ip Lau Suk-yee confirmed her bank account had been compromised after she opened an email claiming to have been sent by MTR Chairman Raymond Ch'ien. Ip said the letter was disguised as an appeal for help. It is understood an attachment in the fraudulent email installed malicious software on her computer. This collected Ip's online banking password in a scam police described as common. Ip said the losses were limited to her personal accounts and there was no evidence that any publically sensitive or government information had been compromised. 
Jail for milk powder breaches 
Fanling Magistrates' Court principal magistrate Woo Huey-fang sent another person to prison for two weeks for defying the two-tin limit on infant formula. Zhang Cuirong, a 47-year-old mainlander, was arrested for attempting to export prohibited articles, not under and in accordance with an export license, for trying to take 10.8 kg of milk powder across the border. Principal Magistrate Woo Huey-fang, who earlier decried rampant breaches of the milk powder rule, said a deterrent sentence was necessary. 
Doubts raised over Sat sessions 
Legislative Council (LegCo) Finance Committee Chairman Cheung Yu-yan said by this afternoon (Friday) members had to respond to the question of whether to hold two additional sessions to discuss the HK$35-million Innovation and Technology Bureau establishment funding request on Saturday. But Cheung expressed doubts as to whether the two additional sessions, totaling four hours, would be sufficient for all the questions posed by lawmakers. Asked whether he would end the filibustering, Cheung said LegCo's rules of procedure did not stipulate how many questions each lawmaker was allowed to ask. 
China Daily 

(HK Edition 02/06/2015 page7)

