


      A group of mainland-phobic protesters marched in Sheung Shui, New Territories, on Sunday. They were shouting "Reclaim Sheung Shui and defend our town!" while verbally abusing anyone along the way who looked like tourists from the mainland. Some protesters refused to leave after the march ended and confronted police officers on the scene. One of the organizers of the mob-like demonstration, Ray Wong Toi-yeung, was arrested on suspicion of assaulting a police officer amid the chaos.
      
        Wong is the spokesman of "localist" group Hong Kong Indigenous (HKI). It issued a statement after the demonstration claiming a video clip posted on the Internet showed Wong had had no physical contact with any policeman before he was pushed to the ground by an officer. The statement concluded the police "staged" the tussle to "frame" Wong for assault. However, there is also video footage (such as television news coverage) proving HKI wrong.
        
          It is now a case of what "we" say and what "they" say. But people should reach their own conclusions based on facts.
          
            No matter what the protesters say, it is a well-known that the Hong Kong Police Force's reputation precedes it as far as patience and restraint are concerned. By comparison, their United States counterparts are much quicker to respond in kind when their officers sense the imminent threat of violence. The difference is almost like day and night, some may say.
            
              Hong Kong police officers are often criticized for being reluctant to take action when necessary rather than being too quick to act.
              
                HKI, not surprisingly, is convinced the police should have done nothing and let the protesters do whatever they wanted. They have wantonly committed many offenses since they formed the group last year. Wong, for example, is no stranger to defying police instructions while harassing innocent people on the street in the name of "protesting against parallel traders". He and his followers drew strong condemnation last year after they publicly mistreated strangers during a "reclaim Sheung Shui demonstration". They were caught by TV cameras frightening a little girl and reducing her to tears. Neither Wong nor HKI has issued a public apology to the people they traumatized, physically and/or emotionally.
                
                  The truth is Wong and his followers already violated the Public Order Ordinance when they refused to disperse after their abusive protest. By that time police had every reason to remove them forcibly or even arrest them for disturbing the peace - but they did not. They had no need to "frame" Wong for anything whatsoever. They took Wong away and booked him for assaulting a police officer because he actually did this.
                  
                    HKI and its sympathizers launched a media offensive after Wong's arrest and, of course, slammed the police for using excessive force, among other ridiculous accusations. They even tried to justify their unlawful behavior by likening the harassment of innocent people with the illegal "Occupy Central" movement last fall. The openly pro- "Hong Kong independence" magazine published by the student union of the University of Hong Kong demanded in a statement that police "stop any truth-twisting accusations and make sure no police officer ever steps out of bounds again". It went on to say, "The people have the right to be free from any threat of violence. When the police collectively lose their ability to follow rules and allow instances of violence to spread unchecked, it will be the time for the people to rise in defense of institutional justice."
                    
                      I do not know what rules the statement was referring to and I am not at all worried about excessive use of force by the police. This is because I am confident the police will do their job by the book as they always do. I am bothered, however, by the prospect of increasing abusive acts by people like Wong and other lawless "occupiers". I'm sure Hong Kong residents remember vividly the violent behavior of some "protesters" during the 79-day illegal "Occupy" campaign last fall. Their savage attack on the Legislative Council Complex caused hundreds of thousand dollars in property damage and millions of people saw it on TV or the Internet.
                      
                        The statement is right about one thing, though - that "people have the right to be free from any threats of violence". The source of violence, however, is not the police but the mindless "protesters" whom HKI and its supporters are trying to glorify by justifying their illegal behavior. Indeed, it is time "for the people to rise in defense of institutional justice" - but not by limiting the police's ability to enforce the law.
                        
                          We need to stop illegal acts by those who seek personal gain by disrupting public order using "democracy" as an excuse.
                          
                            The author is a current affairs commentator.
                            
(HK Edition 09/11/2015 page10)

