
With debates on Hong Kong's proposed electoral reforms fast drawing to an end, a growing consensus believes that the Legislative Council's impending vote on the SAR government's reform proposals will prove to be a watershed in the city's long-term social and economic development. 
Successful implementation of universal suffrage for the election of the next Chief Executive in 2017, and subsequently of returning all lawmakers by universal suffrage in as early as 2020, will not only mark a shining milestone in Hong Kong's democratic development - the greatest step forward the city has ever taken on its road to democracy. It will also be a reassuring sign the SAR will manage to maintain its economic prosperity to cope with future challenges. 
At a time when the city is confronted with formidable challenges - ones that come not only from daunting domestic problems such as a widening wealth gap, a severe housing shortage and an extremely narrow economic base and also relentless competition from rising economic rivals - it needs stronger leadership and more effective governance than ever before. Without this, Hong Kong's chances of successfully coping with these challenges are slim. 
There can be no argument that successful implementation of universal suffrage will give the city's next top leader a stronger mandate that will enable him or her to implement policies more effectively. A failure to push through the electoral reform package could only extend the political wrangling indefinitely; the city's already broken social fabric could be damaged further. The SAR government will only find it more difficult to implement the much-needed policies to tackle the city's deep-rooted problems and cope with external challenges. The result will be disastrous for the city. It will herald the decline of Hong Kong. 
In working against the interests of the majority of Hong Kong people, the central government and the nation, rogue politicians will continue to benefit from the support of the tiny minority of radicals. But the moderate opposition lawmakers will only suffer political rejection as well as the deterioration of society. 
At a time when Hong Kong's long-term development is at the crossroads, moderate opposition lawmakers find themselves burdened with great historic responsibility by virtue of their critical votes. Only by using political wisdom and courage, can they make the right choice for themselves as well as for Hong Kong. 




(HK Edition 06/03/2015 page12)

