
With the contentious democratic development process out of the way after having been blocked by the opposition last week, the question that now confronts us is: What's next for Hong Kong? 
The fact is the local political arena remains fraught with uncertainties, and events that might be unthinkable could happen. The spotlight may well be on the upcoming district council elections later this year, as well as next year's all-important Legislative Council polls. Any changes in personnel within different political camps will have a big impact on their election strategies along with conspiracy theories. This is a reality politicians will have to face. 
As a native of Hong Kong, I'm too concerned about our future. I hope we can march forward together for the sake of progress for our citizens and offer a brighter future for the next generation. Amid the challenges ahead, we can expect further political infighting. This is a very worrying and frustrating scenario with no easy solution in sight. 
As we enter the post-reform era, the SAR government faces a more difficult situation. The government has pledged to focus on economic development and improving the quality of life for residents. But, the cruel reality is it has little say or enforcement authority on matters other than economic and livelihood issues. Since economic development and improving people's livelihood are crucial to society's well-being, I think even the most die-hard political forces will not dare to work on strategies that tend to go against their interests. Indeed, opposition lawmakers have made it clear they will not block bills concerning livelihood initiatives by filibustering. 
The nagging problem is that on matters concerning economic development and people's livelihood, the government has a restricted role. There's a high chance it may have to raise welfare benefits to make the people happier in order to win their undivided support in the legislature. This could mean offering more sweeteners in future budgets. 
Changes are also inevitable in future elections. After vetoing the constitutional reform plans, the "pan-democrats" might have consolidated the base of their staunch supporters. But they might have lost "middle-ground" voters as well. Before the historic vote on the democracy blueprint was taken, the "pan-democrat" camp itself had been troubled by a multitude of different voices. Will there be an even deeper split among them? It will all have a direct bearing on the outcome of future elections. The district council elections, to be held in November, will be an eye-opener for the future development and strategies of the opposition camp. 
Although the district council and Legislative Council elections are not exactly the same, the rule of the game applies - that by virtue of the proportional representation system, a candidate can always secure a seat with a small number of votes. This suggests district councilors do have a key role to play in the polls. 
The political bickering over electoral reforms has been seen to have spread to the district council. It's observed that some district councilors have vigorously aired their views on the issue to try to win more support. This has become the norm. That's why the coming district council elections will mean a lot for Hong Kong's future political development. The calm before the storm is likely to be the harbinger for another political wave. 
The pro-establishment camp also faces tough elections ahead amid concern over their image in the minds of voters. Although it has a strong force to mobilize voters, the pro-establishment camp still needs someone who can perform "on stage". One of their lawmakers has made a good point - it's not easy to get well-educated professionals into politics as they would need to give up their successful careers to face dirty politics. 
To the pro-establishment forces, the need to revitalize themselves with wider participation by young people is urgent, but the existing system that values seniority and experience is not easy to change. When we look at the number of new faces in the pro-establishment camp, there aren't really many. This is a prime issue they need to consider seriously. 
On the other hand, radical forces have been fortifying their positions. Under the proportional representation system, these forces are guaranteed some seats in the legislature, and there's a dangerous trend that the "pan-democrats" would be dominated by radicals. 
The SAR government's vow to focus on the economy and livelihood issues is commendable, but this may just be wishful thinking. Political disagreements, it seems, are here to stay. 




(HK Edition 06/25/2015 page10)

