
Lau Nai-keung argues that by siding with Hong Kong's dissidents, the 'holy man' may have missed a cardinal truth about the plutocratic interests he is advancing 
The theme of the July 1 march this year was "To build a democratic Hong Kong, regain the future of our city". The organizers' ultimate goals were to urge Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying to step down, to abolish the functional constituencies and to amend the Basic Law. 
While local government officials in a statement after the march emphasized that amending the Basic Law would not benefit the long-term and overall well-being of the city, the Basic Law does provide a mechanism for amending itself. 
Chapter VIII of the Basic Law is on "Interpretation and Amendment of the Basic Law". But within the chapter, Article 159 also makes it clear that "no amendment to this Law shall contravene the established basic policies of the People's Republic of China regarding Hong Kong". 
I am not sure how our dissidents want to amend the Basic Law, but it is unlikely that any amendments can circumvent the current rules on constitutional reform laid out by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. 
Article 159 specifies that "amendment bills from the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall be submitted to the National People's Congress by the delegation of the Region to the National People's Congress after obtaining the consent of two-thirds of the deputies of the Region to the National People's Congress, two-thirds of all the members of the Legislative Council of the Region, and the Chief Executive of the Region". 
If our dissidents consider the Legislative Council a tough battlefield because of the "loyalists" in the functional constituencies, they should know full well that the deputies of the SAR to the National People's Congress are going to be an even harder nut to crack. 
Our government officials do not encourage amending the Basic Law now because the process would unnecessarily politicize Hong Kong society again. After the constitutional reform saga which has just ended, we need to redirect our attention to other much more pressing issues such as poverty, housing and economic competitiveness. The officials' approach is understandable, but their statement should not be taken as a categorical rejection of the idea of amending the Basic Law. 
Like "democracy", "amend the Basic Law" has now become the panacea that our dissidents prescribe for all Hong Kong's ills. But again, their demand to amend the law has no substance. Like "democracy", it is just an empty slogan. 
After the government's July 1 cocktail party, Cardinal Joseph Zen Ze-kiun wrote a letter of complaint to the Chief Executive because the agitator "Long Hair" Leung Kwok-hung was not invited. Zen claimed that Leung Kwok-hung, as a legislative councilor, has always been invited to this party before, and that not inviting him this year was somehow an insult to the "executive-legislative relationship". 
Few if any English-language media reported Zen's complaint, perhaps because it was too pathetic and embarrassing. It cannot help but remind us that both Zen and Leung Kwok-hung have secretly received huge sums of money from media tycoon Jimmy Lai Chee-ying. Connected by a common patron, they are now such close friends that the former Catholic bishop has taken a keen interest in his Trotskyite friend's social life. 
If we put Zen's single-minded obsession with these petty things into a larger context, where Pope Francis is addressing the problems created by global capitalism, the whole thing is even more amusing. 
"Let us not be afraid to say it: We want change, real change, structural change," the pope said, decrying the capitalist system that "has imposed the mentality of profit at any price, with no concern for social exclusion or the destruction of nature". 
Jimmy Lai and his newspaper are champions of liberal capitalism, or what Pope Francis calls the "dung of the devil". Figuratively speaking, Zen lives off that dung like a dung beetle. 
Pope Francis might not approve of Article 5 of the Basic Law where it says "the socialist system and policies shall not be practiced in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, and the previous capitalist system and way of life shall remain unchanged for 50 years". I will have nothing but admiration for Zen if he tries to amend that article to impose changes to our current capitalist system before the 50-year period after reunification expires. 
Otherwise, Zen and "Long Hair" can party together every July 1, and no one will miss them. 




(HK Edition 07/15/2015 page9)

