







Hung Hsiu-chu, the KMT's nominee for Taiwan election



Taiwan's ruling Kuomintang took a step closer to naming its nominee for next year's Taiwan leadership elections after polling over the weekend showed that the current "vice-president" of the legislature is a viable candidate. 
The survey, conducted on Friday and Saturday to gauge how favorably voters viewed Hung Hsiu-chu and how she might fare against the opposition party's nominee, found she could win, Kuomintang Secretary-General Lee Shu-chuan said at a news conference on Sunday. The party's central committee will meet on Wednesday to finalize a roster to be put before a party congress on Friday, where a formal nomination will take place. 
"I can't think of any scenario in which I won't be nominated by my party," Hung told reporters after the results were announced. "I will work harder to earn everyone's support before the national congress meeting." 
The election, scheduled for Jan 16, will mark the exit of the KMT's Ma Ying-jeou, who was first elected in 2008 and served the two-term limit. One of the main issues will be Taiwan's relationship with the Chinese mainland - with the KMT more in favor of improving ties than the main opposition Democratic Progressive Party. 
In April, the DPP named chairwoman Tsai Ing-wen, who ran against Ma in 2012, as its nominee for leadership. 
Two of the KMT's most senior members, Chairman Eric Chu and legislative speaker Wang Jin-pyng, have said they won't seek the party nomination. 
"If I am nominated by KMT, I hope the two female contenders can give people a brand-new campaign and set a new model of democracy," Hung said, referring to Tsai. 
Hung, who has served as the deputy leader of the legislature since 2012, called last week for the signing of a peace agreement with the Chinese mainland in a party address, the Taipei-based Central News Agency reported. Hung was previously a high school teacher and holds a master's degree in education from Northeast Missouri State University, according to her profile on the legislature's website. 