


      Never before have the "pan-democrat" lawmakers in Hong Kong been so detached from the electorate. In jointly vowing to veto any electoral reform package developed within the established legal framework, they display great contempt for the Hong Kong residents.
      
        In a latest opinion poll released late last month, nearly 61 percent of respondents expressed their hopes of seeing the SAR progress to universal suffrage in 2017. A move to vote down the proposed constitutional reforms will not only be against the wishes of the public, it will also prevent Hong Kong from taking its greatest step forward ever in terms of democratic development.
        
          Some might have hoped the SAR government would be ready to restart the five-step process on electoral reform when the current process stops after the proposed package is vetoed in the Legislative Council (LegCo). They are deluding themselves. The move to start the five-step process was a momentous decision. The SAR government did not make such a decision lightly. Nor was the central government always ready to agree to it.
          
            The political wrangling surrounding universal suffrage, particularly the 79-day illegal "Occupy Central" campaign, tore society apart. Interrupting the current electoral reform process half way through will only divide Hong Kong further. The subsequent toxic political environment in the city won't allow the SAR government to restart the five-step process any time soon. It is anyone's guess when they will be able to restart the process.
            
              A failure to achieve universal suffrage for selection of the next Chief Executive in 2017 also means an indefinite delay for returning all legislators via "one person, one vote". This is just what radical lawmakers want. By virtue of the system of proportional representation, which favors parties and independent candidates with fewer votes, radical lawmakers have managed to win and keep their seats in LegCo merely by rallying the support of the few members of the community with political stunts and slogans - rather through any solid political achievements. They will continue to benefit politically from a divided society.
              
                But moderate lawmakers from the "pan-democrat" camp can expect a strong political backlash if they allow themselves to be hijacked by their radical peers and vote down the proposed electoral reform package, therefore depriving citizens of their right to universal suffrage. The next LegCo election scheduled for 2016 could be their "day of reckoning".
                
                  It certainly needs courage and political wisdom for the moderates to break ranks with their radical peers. But by giving democracy a chance they can show they respect the wishes of the public.
                  
(HK Edition 04/16/2015 page10)

