
C.K. Yueng calls on lawmakers not to deny Hong Kong residents their long-awaited right to elect the Chief Executive by universal suffrage in 2017 
Hong Kong's next election for its Chief Executive will be in March 2017, four months after the US presidential elections in November 2016. Across the Pacific, pre-election fever is already in the air, but sadly here in this tiny place we call home, we remain stuck in a blood feud over how to elect our leader, let alone who to vote for. 
Even without the right to cast a vote in the US presidential election, I felt excited when Hillary Clinton declared her candidacy - in an electoral system without "civic nomination", something Hong Kong "pan-democrats" have been demanding. I feel even more politically aroused when one of her potential rivals, Marco Rubio, with his lady-killer charm, dismissed the former first lady as "a leader from yesterday promising to take us back to yesterday". She is experienced, polished and charming; and he, young, futuristic, dynamic and equally charming. Who should I vote for if I were an American, I indulged myself in the pleasure of a fantasy, a fantasy that is clouded by a deep sense of gloom about our own election. Would I as a Hong Kong resident have the chance to cast my vote in 2017? 
My mind screams "I want to vote!" 
Across the Straits in Taiwan, election fever is also running high, with Tsai Ing-wen declaring her candidacy - again without so-called "civic nomination". The media will soon be digging up dirt, pollsters churning out popularity ratings, pundits dishing out commentaries horse-racing style, and voters rubbing their hands in gleeful anticipation of choosing their leader. 
And what is happening here in Hong Kong, where we have been squabbling with so much fervor and so little enlightenment over how to elect our leader? 
We have come a long way politically from having a British governor parachuted into Hong Kong to rule the place pre-1997, to a "one person, one vote" electoral system to elect our leader in 2017. Hong Kong's return to the motherland in 1997 was a historic inevitability. But our prospects for universal suffrage in 2017 are not. They are rather a choice, in our hands. We can seize the opportunity, or forego it. We are at a crossroads of history. The choice is whether to stand still or move with the current of history, the latter would undoubtedly accelerate our democratization process. 
In Taiwan, pollsters predicted a Tsai victory over her likely rival, Eric Chu Li-Luan, by 8 percent if the election was to take place today. Part of the excitement of an election is in seeing a group of candidates competing for public support, as reflected by pre-election poll approval ratings. Elections would not be so exciting without the ups and downs of candidate approval ratings: Who is trailing, who is leading? Scholars refer to this as the "horse-race effect" of election polls. 
A problem with horse race election polls is that they focus public attention on the popularity ratings of candidates rather than on their policy positions, judging each candidate not on substance but on their relative poll rankings. 
But beyond reflecting public support and track the electoral process, polls also influence voter preference, and can be instrumental in influencing public support for candidates. 
Projecting Taiwan's scenario to Hong Kong: If Executive Council and Legislative Council member Regina Ip were to run against Audrey Eu of the "pan-democratic camp", and election polls showed that the former were leading the latter by eight points, how would that influence the electoral fortunes of the two candidates? Polling experts point to multi-directional impacts: Voters who don't follow the elections closely are likely to jump on the Ip bandwagon in the belief that there must be a valid reason why she is leading Audrey Eu, despite the latter's "goddess of democracy" halo. Or, on seeing the "goddess of democracy" reduced to a Cinderella of democracy, voters might swing toward Eu out of sympathy. Or a disastrous poll showing could lose Eu the nomination as a CE candidate. 
How exactly voters will respond to ratings depends on multiple variables, including the candidates' election tactics, how they are portrayed in the media, and the extent of voter knowledge. 
On polling day itself, exit polls can be another significant factor. If in 2017 we had a replay of the last CE election, with Democratic Party's Albert Ho pitted against the two pro-establishment candidates Leung Chun-ying and Henry Tang, and assuming that exit polls determined Ho to be a lost cause, his supporters might swing their support to Tang in "tactical voting" to prevent Leung from being re-elected. Some argue that such moves undermine the integrity of democratic elections. Indeed, many Western democracies ban the announcement of exit poll results until voting has closed. Would we in Hong Kong allow exit polls to be released in our first-ever general election? I want to know! And I want to vote! 
"Pan-democrats" and pro-establishment alike: Hear us good. We each have a vote. We want to exercise it. We don't want to remain helpless and voiceless as our leader is being chosen. We ask you to give compromise a chance, and give our incipient universal suffrage a chance. Please don't rob us of this long-awaited right to exercise our historic duty. We want to vote! 




(China Daily 05/08/2015 page10)

