NEW DELHI — Seeking to dispel widespread rumors that he will find a way to cling to power beyond the end of his second term next year, President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan said Wednesday that there was “no circumstance that will allow me to stay as president.”“And there are two reasons for that,” he said. “One is I’m exhausted. Really, totally exhausted, and I would like to be retired. And second, why would I ruin my legacy by staying on and taking an opportunity away from Afghanistan to become an institutionalized democracy?”Elections are scheduled for April, and American and European officials say privately that billions of dollars of aid on which Afghanistan depends will be jeopardized if the vote does not go ahead.That message has been conveyed to Mr. Karzai, the officials have said, and the Afghan leader has repeatedly sought to dispel talk that he will try to find a way to stay on beyond his constitutionally mandated two five-year terms.But the rumors have persisted, fueled in part by the reticence of possible contenders to declare their interest in running.To do so, Afghan politicians and analysts say, would be to acknowledge that Mr. Karzai is a lame duck. With government power highly centralized in the presidency — the president appoints everyone from ministers to district governors, for instance — few top officials are willing to risk angering Mr. Karzai by openly campaigning to fill his job.Mr. Karzai said he had come to New Delhi with a “wish list” that he hoped India would fill. He and others in his party refused to specify what was on the list. India provides training to Afghan forces, although that training is done entirely in India.India could provide small arms that are made in India, but those weapons are generally not highly regarded. India has to buy from abroad most of the weapons that Afghanistan might want.Mr. Karzai’s trip to India was overshadowed by that of the Chinese prime minister, Li Keqiang, who left New Delhi on Tuesday just as Mr. Karzai was ushered in to see Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. The two visits, along with the leadership change this month  in Pakistan, made for an unusually active week in top-level South Asian political jockeying.Afghanistan’s outreach to India has long been a source of intense concern in Pakistan, but Mr. Karzai said Wednesday that he needed permission from no one to conduct diplomacy. “Afghanistan is a sovereign country, and like all sovereigns, it has the right to choose its friends,” he said. “But our relations with India will not be at the cost of Pakistan or a cause for worry for Pakistan.”Mr. Karzai said he welcomed the election in Pakistan that is likely to make Nawaz Sharif that country’s next prime minister, saying he had dined with Mr. Sharif last year in Islamabad. “I found him very much inclined to better relations with India,” Mr. Karzai said. “I found him aware of the dangers of terrorism.”Mr. Karzai dismissed widespread concerns that his government was deeply corrupt and that members of his family had been among the worst offenders. Most corruption, he said, results from the contracting practices of foreign countries, “especially on the part of the United States.”The worst corruption centered for years on private security companies, which he finally banned, he said. Beyond that, those who criticize Afghan corruption mostly do so for political reasons, said Mr. Karzai, who late last month acknowledged that the Central Intelligence Agency had for more than a decade financed a presidential slush fund used to buy the support of warlords, lawmakers and other powerful Afghans.“If Denmark criticizes corruption in Afghanistan, I will see it as meant to improve things,” he said. “But if the United States does it, I will simply laugh at it.”Mr. Karzai dismissed the idea that Afghanistan might turn as violent and chaotic as Iraq after most foreign troops leave in 2014. “Iraq is a very unfortunate situation,” he said. “We are pained to see the way Iraq is suffering. I can tell you with a strong measure of confidence that Afghanistan will not see that.”The reason, he said, is that Afghanistan has never suffered the sort of sectarian violence that Iraq has experienced.The peace process is continuing but can be successful only with the participation of Pakistan, he said, adding: “Pakistan has influence over the Taliban because they have residence there, to put it mildly.”