When Nico Muhly’s opera “Two Boys” has its American premiere at the Metropolitan Opera this month, it will be the first work to make it to the stage of the Met from a commissioning program that the company began seven years ago with Lincoln Center Theater.Although the commissioning program has gotten off to a slow start — some projects, announced to great fanfare years ago, fizzled before a note was written — it is getting new life, and new composers, as its first work gets a Met premiere. The composers Matthew Aucoin, David T. Little and Joshua Schmidt recently joined the program, which pairs composers with librettists and works with creative teams to develop new operas or musicals. The works are then performed in workshops, in the hope that some might make it to the stage of the Met or Lincoln Center Theater.The commissioning program raises interesting questions about what 21st-century opera should sound like, how and where it should be presented, and just where musical theater ends and opera begins. Fewer than half of the original dozen composers chosen for the program, who were drawn from the worlds of classical music, musical theater, pop and jazz, have made it to the workshop phase so far.But the program is hardly the only route for contemporary opera to get to the Met these days. A number of other new works, new commissions and Met premieres are being planned for future seasons, company officials disclosed for the first time, as the Met continues to try to shake off its reputation for stodginess by turning to more adventurous programming.The Met plans to present a new Thomas Adès opera, based on Luis Buñuel’s “Exterminating Angel,” that it commissioned along with the Salzburg Festival and the Royal Opera, in the 2017-18 season, officials said. A new Osvaldo Golijov opera based on the Euripides play “Iphigenia in Aulis” that had been commissioned several years ago but was delayed is being planned for the following season.The Met’s recent survey of operas by John Adams will continue next season with the Met’s first performance of his 1991 work, “The Death of Klinghoffer.” And in the 2016-17 season, the Met plans to present Kaija Saariaho’s 2000 opera, “L’Amour de Loin.” That will make Ms. Saariaho the first woman to have her work performed by the company since Ethel Smyth, whose opera “Der Wald” had its Met premiere in 1903.“For opera to be significant as an art form, it’s absolutely essential that we do present new work, and new work for our audiences,” said Peter Gelb, who initiated the opera commissioning program when he became the Met’s general manager in 2006. He said that “Met audiences are experiencing more modern masterpieces than they have in recent years from living composers, and I think that’s important.”Not all the composers tapped for the commissioning program — in which each team of composer and librettist is awarded $50,000 — have panned out. Some, like Wynton Marsalis, the managing and artistic director of Jazz at Lincoln Center, and Jake Heggie, the composer of the opera “Dead Man Walking,” decided that they were too busy with other work to continue, the Met said.The singer-songwriter Rufus Wainwright parted ways with the Met in 2008 after he decided that he wanted his new opera, “Prima Donna,” to be in French, while the Met insisted on English. Mr. Wainwright also said he was impatient with the pace at the Met, which had told him that the opera could not be performed until 2014, at the earliest. (After he left, the piece had its premiere at the Manchester International Festival in 2009, and was given its American premiere by New York City Opera in 2012.)Several other prominent composers, including Michael John LaChiusa and Scott Wheeler, had workshops of their works, but the Met passed on those.After Mr. Wheeler’s opera “The Sorrows of Frederick,” with a libretto by Romulus Linney, the playwright, was given a workshop performance last spring, the Met decided that the work’s chamber-opera character made it better suited to a smaller house, while Lincoln Center Theater felt it was too operatic to fit comfortably at the Vivian Beaumont Theater. As André Bishop, Lincoln Center Theater’s artistic director, put it in an interview, “it was too small for the Met and too big for the Beaumont, musically.”“It’s a lovely piece, and absolutely should be done — based on a very gripping play,” added Mr. Bishop, who said he was recommending it to other opera companies around the country.Mr. Wheeler, whose opera “Democracy,” also with a libretto by Linney, had its premiere in 2005 at the Washington National Opera, had nothing but praise for his experience with the commissioning program. “It was an amazing opportunity — a great, great thing,” he said in an interview, describing the creative process and the workshop performances. “I have a piece that I am assured has a future.”It is perhaps surprising that “Two Boys,” the first work to come out of the program, would go to straight to a 3,800-seat opera house like the Met, and not to the 1,150-seat Vivian Beaumont Theater next door. The Royal Opera House in London, which has become a fount of new commissions in recent years, often uses its smaller Linbury Studio Theater for new work. But the needs of the Met and the Beaumont are different: Mr. Bishop noted that for a piece to work at the Beaumont, it would have to use a smaller orchestra than the Met would use, and have the kind of vocal parts that could be performed eight times a week for an extended run. Still, he said he hopes the program will yield work for his theater.Mr. Muhly’s “Two Boys,” with a libretto by Craig Lucas and directed by Bartlett Sher, had its workshop in 2009, and received its premiere at the English National Opera in 2011. It has been revised further as it prepares for the Met.Mr. Gelb said that bringing new work to the Met was good for opera, and for the opera house: “It brings a new audience into the theater.”