BEIJING — He lectured students about the trespasses of the Communist Party, publicly belittled the country’s mighty propaganda minister and issued frequent demands for an end to single-party rule in China.But in voting two weeks ago to dismiss Xia Yeliang, an economist, from his teaching post at Peking University, university officials say, they weighed only one criterion: his performance as an academic.“He just wasn’t a good teacher,” Sun Qixiang, dean of the school of economics, said Friday in an interview. “Politics had nothing to do with this decision.”In the week since Professor Xia was dismissed, university officials have been buffeted by criticism that their decision was in retaliation for his activism against the government. The Committee of Concerned Scientists issued a letter condemning the vote, and faculty members at a number of educational institutions around the world have been questioning their colleges’ cooperative arrangements with one of China’s best universities.“A university is an open forum for exploring truth, and sharing opinions and academic freedom is the foundation for its existence,” a group of professors at National Taiwan University wrote in an open letter this week. “Suppressing that freedom by political means constitutes a major obstacle to exploring truth and destroys the spiritual cornerstone of a university.”But Professor Xia’s colleagues say such criticism is unfair, and insist that politics played no role in their decision. The vote was 30 against renewing his contract and three in favor, with one abstention, according to officials.On Friday, three economics professors along with Ms. Sun, the dean, gathered in a university conference room to defend their votes, saying Professor Xia, who had been teaching at the university for a decade, had been repeatedly urged to improve his teaching style, which they described as deeply unpopular with students. In recent years, they said, he had racked up more than 340 negative student reviews, earning him the worst teaching record among the university’s 60 or so instructors during three evaluations. They added that he had published only one paper in recent years, an important factor in determining whether to renew faculty contracts every three years.“We had hoped he could improve his teaching and research,” said Li Qingyun, a professor of economics who has taught at the university for more than three decades. “This is from the bottom of my heart.”In an interview on Friday, Professor Xia, 53, defended his academic performance and maintained his insistence that the vote was politically motivated, citing warnings from the university’s Communist Party secretary that mentioned his online pro-democracy writings. He said he was notified only once about his bottom ranking in teaching evaluations, not three times as university officials assert, and noted that 340 negative evaluations represented a small portion of the thousands of students he had taught over the years.“All such records are in their hands right now, so they can say whatever they want,” he said of administrators. He added that his name had appeared in a number of publications since 2008, including two articles that are readily available online. “They are lying,” he said.There is little dispute that Professor Xia’s classroom style could be polarizing. Most of the 30 anonymous reviews posted on a popular teacher evaluation Web site, Pinglaoshi, or Judge the Teacher, were positive. “He’s a good professor with a conscience,” said one comment posted in 2007. “He’s brave and knowledgeable,” read another.But in recent days, a number of former students have come forward, most of them anonymously, to defend the university’s refusal to renew his contract. Valentina Luo, a former student who attended his class on principles of economics, said Professor Xia had spent more time boasting about his time as a visiting scholar in the United States than lecturing about the fundamentals of finance and market economics.“I don’t remember much of his political rants against the government, but he gives the impression that he doesn’t prepare for his classes,” said Ms. Luo, who posted her criticisms online. “He just reads the textbook word by word.”Another student who took the same class agreed. “There are many Peking University teachers who are also outspoken about their political views, but Xia is one of those that students don’t really like,” said the student, who asked that only his surname, Sun, be used.Such criticisms, coupled with Peking University’s strenuous defense of its decision to let him go, are unlikely to quell the widespread perception that politics played a role in his termination. Given the Communist Party’s control over the country’s universities and a continuing crackdown on dissent — including an ideological campaign against Western-inspired liberalism — Professor Xia’s supporters say it is naïve to rule out politics.Thomas Cushman, a sociologist at Wellesley College, which entered into an educational partnership with Peking University this year, said he remained suspicious, noting that the economist was the first professor to be dismissed from his department in more than a decade — a fact confirmed by university officials.“There are plenty of people who are bad teachers but who don’t get terminated,” said Professor Cushman, who helped organize an open letter in support of Professor Xia that drew the signatures of more than 140 faculty members. “What troubles me is that there is no verifiable information about his so-called bad teaching.”Although the letter calls on Wellesley to reconsider its arrangement with Peking University, Professor Cushman said he was more focused at the moment on helping Professor Xia. He said an interdisciplinary program he runs, the Freedom Project, plans to offer Professor Xia a two-year fellowship pending final approval from Wellesley administrators.“Given how vulnerable Xia is right now, I think the best thing we can do is to follow through on bringing him here,” he said.But officials at Peking University say Professor Xia has damaged its image at a time when it is trying to ascend to the ranks of the world’s top universities.“Beida didn’t consider politics when dealing with this issue, but now he is using politics to hijack Beida,” said Ms. Sun, the dean, using a common shorthand for the school. “We feel badly hurt.”