Labyrinth Theater Company, which rose to prominence Off Broadway during the 2000s under the leadership of the actors Philip Seymour Hoffman and John Ortiz, has gone on to suffer a string of critical disappointments and is now searching to replace its current artistic directors, according to company members.The problems facing Labyrinth, known for ensemble-driven, multiracial productions like “Our Lady of 121st Street” (2002) and “Jack Goes Boating” (2007), stem partly from the unusual triumvirate put in place in 2009 to succeed Mr. Hoffman, an Oscar winner for “Capote,” and Mr. Ortiz. Those three artistic directors — the playwright Stephen Adly Guirgis, the costume designer Mimi O’Donnell and the actor Yul Vazquez — were expected to lead the troupe, which was founded in 1992, into its next era. But all of them have been busy with their own projects (the Labyrinth posts have been voluntary), and none emerged as a reliably strong hand or dramaturgical force, according to four members of the company’s collective of actors, writers and designers. These four members spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss sensitive internal company matters.The last few Labyrinth productions have been coolly received by theater critics and some audience members. In his review in The New York Times of the company’s production of “Ninth and Joanie” in April, Charles Isherwood bemoaned that Labyrinth was “increasingly rudderless.”A Labyrinth spokesman, Rick Miramontez, confirmed on Monday that one or more new artistic directors were being sought and that the new leadership would be announced in the next few months. However, Mr. Miramontez disputed reports among Labyrinth company members that its board of directors, at a meeting on Friday, had removed Mr. Guirgis — a Tony Award nominee in 2011 for “The ___________ With the Hat” — and one or both of his fellow artistic directors.“The three co-artistic directors continue to perform their roles,” Mr. Miramontez said.For months the Labyrinth board has been considering new leadership structures for the company, which long tried to operate like a democracy and had its inevitable share of rivalries and grievances. According to the four ensemble members, the Friday board meeting ended with some people feeling that a new leadership structure had been chosen, and that Mr. Guirgis and others were not part of it. But Mr. Miramontez, the spokesman, said there had been no coup — the word being used by company members — and that a meeting of the full ensemble was being organized this month to clear up any misunderstandings.Mr. Guirgis declined to comment. Mr. Hoffman was not available for comment, his publicist said, and Ms. O’Donnell and Mr. Vazquez did not reply to a request for comment through Mr. Miramontez. Nor did the chairman of the Labyrinth board, Jeffrey Horwitz, respond to an interview request.Ruth Hendel, a Labyrinth board member and a Broadway producer (“Fela!”), said that the leadership situation was “still being figured out and nothing is cut and dry at this point.”“We’re just going through some growing pains, which can happen in any family,” Ms. Hendel said.A few years ago Labyrinth left its home at the Public Theater, citing production costs of $600,000 a show there, and began focusing on smaller-scale shows staged at the Bank Street Theater.