CAIRO — Tunisia’s prime minister announced a new cabinet on Friday, handing over key ministries previously headed by members of the ruling Islamist party to independent figures in an effort to calm the worst political crisis since the country’s revolt more than two years ago.The Islamist Renaissance Party, or Ennahda, which rules Tunisia in a “troika” coalition with two center-left parties, said that the cabinet reshuffle had reduced its share of ministers in the government and that it had yielded control of the ministries of justice, interior and foreign affairs, bowing to a central demand of several opposition parties.But the party failed to persuade other opposition parties to join its governing coalition, highlighting the divisions that have complicated Tunisia’s transition after the overthrow more than two years ago of its autocratic president, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali.The cabinet reshuffle had been discussed for months, but the calls to reform the government became more urgent after the assassination last month of a leftist opposition leader, Chokri Belaid, who was shot and killed outside his home in Tunis on Feb. 6. Opposition figures accused the Renaissance Party of failing to secure the country, and more specifically, of ignoring threats against Mr. Belaid’s life by hardline Islamists known as Salafis. Officials have said that Mr. Belaid’s killer is still at large.Tunisia’s new prime minister, Ali Laareyedh, a former political prisoner who belongs to the Renaissance Party, said Friday that the government would serve until new elections could be held, and no longer than November.The concessions by his party held out the possibility that Tunisia’s political crisis would ease, and they provided a sharp contrast to the post-revolt struggles elsewhere in the region. In Egypt, the ruling Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt has faced similar criticisms to those leveled at the Renaissance Party, for failing to reform the security services or to repair a battered economy. The Brotherhood has resisted calls by the opposition to reform the government or to meaningfully loosen its grip on power.Analysts said Tunisia’s government still faced a crisis of credibility. Amine Ghali, the program director for the Tunis-based Kawakibi Democracy Transition Center, said that some ministers who were considered ineffective had been kept in their posts or were simply shuffled into new roles.And he called the return of the same governing coalition “a huge failure,” especially after negotiations over a new government that had gone on for about eight months. “This is not the miracle we have been waiting for,” he said.