ISTANBUL — After days of demonstrations that have presented Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan with his worst political crisis in more than a decade of power, the Turkish leader responded on Monday with a supremely confident flourish: he simply turned his back and left, boarding a plane to start a four-day good-will tour of Northern Africa.Throughout the recent upheaval, Mr. Erdogan’s behavior has given new fuel to already-simmering questions about his aims and methods — whether he has turned more autocrat than democrat, or at the least whether a deft politician has fallen into overconfidence.Mr. Erdogan’s political rise has been widely seen as the catalyst for a new era of Turkish influence and prosperity, and he has cast his government as a democratic model for nations with Muslim populations rising up against dictators. Domestically, he has the security of a strong power base among Turkish religious conservatives — a majority of the electorate — who were marginalized by the military and the country’s old secular elite.He alluded to that support on Monday, as protests continued across Turkey’s major cities. He said he could “hardly contain” his constituents from leaving their homes to mount a counterprotest on his behalf. “Be calm, this will all pass,” he added.But for his opponents, his harsh dismissal of the protesters gathering in Istanbul and Ankara as “bums,” and in particular his allowing the police to crack down on what began as a peaceful demonstration against the razing of a park in Taksim Square, is public evidence of a longer slide into authoritarianism. They cite years of intensifying crackdowns on dissent and the news media, and purges of the military officer corps.“He has a highly majoritarian understanding of democracy,” said Ilter Turan, a political scientist at Bilgi University in Istanbul. “He believes that with 51 percent of the vote he can rule in an unrestrained fashion. He doesn’t want checks and balances.”And after 10 years of Mr. Erdogan (pronounced AIR-doh-wan), a former Islamist activist, many liberal or secular Turks have expressed weariness over what they see as his attempts to impose on their private lives: what Cengiz Candar, a popular columnist, described Monday as his “conceit and arrogance.”He has sought to restrict alcohol, has repeatedly held that women should have at least three children and sometimes seems drawn to peculiar topics for pontification: this year, for example, he declared that the “era of white bread is over,” and that Turks should go whole grain.There is an added sting for many who have supported Mr. Erdogan. In his speeches, he has been an eloquent defender of inclusiveness and human rights — statements that added to his political draw among Turks who might otherwise have been put off by his Islamist past. Increasingly, however, his actions have seemed at odds with his words.Mr. Erdogan has been lionized for serving jail time for reciting a poem with religious overtones in public while he was Istanbul’s mayor. And in an interview last year with The Istanbul Review, a literary journal, he said: “Censorship is an unacceptable method of obstruction, not only in literature but in all arts, media, politics and many other fields. The freedom of expression is a right that we work to solidify every day and a subject we are particularly sensitive about.”But in the years since he became prime minister, his government has become a leading jailer of journalists and opposition writers. And over the weekend, he was particularly vocal about protesters’ use of social media, singling out Twitter as a “menace” used to disseminate lies.Mr. Erdogan, 59, grew up in a pious, low-income neighborhood in Istanbul when Turkey was ruled by an elite that heavy-handedly banished religious expression from public life. In rising to power, he took that once-peripheral social class to the center of Turkish public life. And analysts say it will be that constituency’s reaction that determines how he weathers the current crisis.For now, it seems to be standing solidly behind him.Kasimpasa, the hilltop neighborhood where Mr. Erdogan grew up, is not far from Taksim Square, the epicenter of the protests. There, residents refer to Mr. Erdogan as “Baba,” or father, in Turkish, and recall Fridays, after prayers, when neighborhood children would follow him into the shop across from his apartment building and he would buy them candy. He visited the neighborhood last week to open a new sports center where children can learn archery, another offering to the supporters who propelled him to power.At the shop across from Mr. Erdogan’s apartment, Semiha Pacal, the owner, said, “The second he comes, people swarm him.”Ms. Pacal said she and her friends believed that secular Turks were prejudiced against the pious. “What I can’t stand is people who are against us for our religion,” she said.Many of the people in the neighborhood said that they could support the protesters’ original goal of saving the park, but that they were put off when the demonstrations grew into a broad-scale rebuke of Mr. Erdogan’s government, and as personal insults against him were spray-painted on store facades.While some experts have suggested that images of excessive police force against protesters may be enough to mobilize the religious against the government, the people of Kasimpasa say they are outraged by the vandalism and violence of the protesters, which they say triggered the harsh police response.In fact, the protests were peaceful until the police attacked the demonstrators. But many of the Turkish television news networks, long hounded by Mr. Erdogan’s government, did not begin widely covering the events until they had footage that depicted vandalism and destruction at the hands of protesters.“In situations like this, they have to use gas and force,” said Evren Akkaya, 33, a shop owner in Kasimpasa. “They were overturning cars and buses. They are destroying our city.”While Mr. Erdogan seems secure in his support from conservative citizens, there have been cracks in the Islamist-leaning media. Several columnists at the newspaper Zaman, which is linked to the powerful Islamic movement led by Fethullah Gulen, a cleric in exile in the United States, have been critical of Mr. Erdogan’s leadership style.And just after Mr. Erdogan’s flight left on Monday, Turkey’s president, Abdullah Gul, whose power is less than the prime minister’s, spoke to the country and offered a conciliatory tone. “Democracy, however, does not only mean elections,” he said. “There is nothing more natural than various ways of expression other than elections if there are different views, different situations, objections. Peaceful protests are surely part of that.”In a speech in 2011 after his Justice and Development Party won a third term, Mr. Erdogan, already facing accusations of arrogance, said: “We will try to be more humble. We never accepted pride and boastfulness, and will be more careful from now on. Modesty is our motto, and we’ll pay more attention and be on the solid ground of modesty. We will continue to be the servant, not the master of this nation.”Mr. Erdogan, however, has been seeking to gain even more power by changing the Constitution to establish a more powerful presidency, which he would run for next year. His idea has been described as an American-style presidential system, but Mr. Erdogan has said that would not be good enough, and has instead pushed for what he describes as a “Turkish-style” system. “The U.S. president cannot appoint an ambassador, he cannot even solely decide on the sale of a helicopter,” he said last year.Some analysts here say the pride that leads Mr. Erdogan to seek more power after a decade in leadership is likely to govern his response to the current upheaval.Yasin Aktay, a sociology professor who wrote a book on leadership called “Times of Charisma,” which includes an analysis of Mr. Erdogan’s tenure, said it was unlikely that Mr. Erdogan would back down, in part because of a belief that he has been central to Turkey’s ascendance. “He believes that people are being unfair to him after all he has done for Turkey — I.M.F. debts being paid, corruption being controlled. He is angry that he has been reduced to a tree slayer.”