CAIRO — A little-known Islamic extremist group released a video over the weekend providing evidence that it orchestrated a deadly car bombing here last month, while seeking to enlist others in a violent revolt against the military-backed government that ousted President Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood.The group, Ansar Beit el-Maqdis, or Supporters of Jerusalem, has also claimed responsibility for a series of attacks on Egyptian security forces in Sinai, as well as a car bombing last week in Ismailia, on the Suez Canal. But the video about the bombing last month in Cairo, near the home of the interior minister, appeared to be the most convincing corroboration of any of the group’s claims.The video, lasting about 30 minutes, includes surveillance footage taken beforehand at the street corner near the minister’s house where the bombing later occurred; footage of the explosion as it takes place; and statements recorded in advance by the suicide bomber who carried out the attack. A spokesman for the Interior Ministry, Gen. Abdel Fattah Othman, said in a television interview that it had concluded independently that the explosion was set off by the bomber in the video, a former military officer who was dismissed for his Islamist sympathies.The video also indicates that Ansar Beit el-Maqdis hopes to attract young Islamists as recruits for a hard-line insurgency, in part by criticizing the Muslim Brotherhood’s commitment to democracy and nonviolence. Narrators are heard attacking “fake, democratic Islam” almost as often as they do Egypt’s “infidel” military leaders and those who collaborate with them.The bomber, Waleed Badr, is heard disparaging “this farce called the democratic Islam,” and saying that Ansar Beit el-Maqdis warns the Brotherhood “to keep away from methods created by the West, which wanted to impose them on us to spoil our religion, but to no avail.”Instead of emphasizing moderation and democracy, a narrator says the Brotherhood should have rallied Muslims around “the sovereignty of Shariah,” opposition to Israel and rejecting Egypt’s “Americanized military power.”“What would you have lost?” the narrator asks of the Brotherhood. “Would they have prevented you from reaching power? There, they have ousted you. Would America have been upset with you? There, it has been upset. Would they have detained you? There, they are detaining you. Would they have shed your blood? There, they are shedding your blood and burning your headquarters and assaulting mosques.” Regardless of the Brotherhood’s attempts to reassure the generals, the narrator says, the military “is your enemy, and it is forcibly removing you.”Mr. Badr, the bomber, calls the Brotherhood naïve for opting mainly for nonviolent protests against the takeover of power by the top military leader, General Abdul-Fattah el-Sisi. Egyptian security forces sent to disperse the protests have killed more than a thousand Islamists in mass shootings. “Sisi thought you would avenge your religion, so he increased the numbers and fortification of the police and military units in anticipation,” Mr. Badr says. “But he had only found chants and shouts and bare chests. So you were an easy prey for him — to be murdered, captured, tortured and harassed.”“Why do you shy away from armed confrontation?” Mr. Badr asks. “From a logical point of view, iron must be fought with iron and fire by fire.”Ansar Beit el-Maqdis first appeared after the ouster of former President Hosni Mubarak in 2011. The group claimed responsibility for several attacks against Israeli interests, including an attack on Israeli border guards and the bombing of a pipeline in the Egyptian Sinai that delivers natural gas to Israel.The group was relatively quiet during Mr. Morsi’s year in office. But since he was ousted on July 3, Ansar Beit el-Maqdis has claimed responsibility for a series of attacks on Egyptian soldiers and security forces, mainly in the relatively lawless Sinai, where it is believed to be based.Its car bombings, however, have raised greater alarm, because they show the group reaching beyond its home turf, evoking memories of an Islamist insurgency that flared up here in the 1990s, with attacks across the country.The car bombing in Ismailia last week injured six soldiers near an intelligence building. The September explosion believed to have been set off by Mr. Badr appeared intended to kill the interior minister as his motorcade passed. The minister escaped injury, but at least one person was killed and more than 20 civilian bystanders were injured, according to state news reports.