When United Airlines Flight 175 hit the South Tower, the windows in Mark Scherzer’s apartment collapsed inward in a fine spray of glass shards. Then the tower collapsed and a metal beam flew in, true as an arrow. Dust, inches thick, covered his floors, bed and shelves.Mr. Scherzer, 62, and his partner became vagabonds for months after Sept. 11, relying on the kindness and couches of friends.Still Mr. Scherzer, a native son of the Bronx, could not wait to return to his apartment on Cedar Street, a few feet from ground zero. This was home, and he rebuilt it. What he cannot countenance is what he sees when he looks outside his window, which is to say fear’s stockade.The Police Department now refers to his neighborhood as “the World Trade Center campus,” as if it were an arid exercise in corporate security.Step outside and you tumble into rivers of tourists herded this way and that, from fleets of buses, through serried rows of fences and tents to the memorial.There are security towers and dozens of police officers, some possessing impressive armament.The construction will end. But the plan for the remade streets could offer a cyborg vision of this city, with metal barriers, sally ports, checkpoints and three-foot-high barriers.Undergo a security check and you can obtain a “Trusted Access” certificate and sidestep the worst of it. You can ride a bike, if you’re prepared to dismount and let dogs sniff you.It’s as if a thief crept in and stole away with our hurly-burly anarchic identity.“Security cannot be the be-all and end-all of how we organize our lives,” said Mr. Scherzer, who has joined his neighbors in suing to block the “fortresslike” plans for his neighborhood. “There is a constant sense of police presence — everything is observed, every movement regulated.“New York has never been that for me.”In 2003, hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers took to the streets to protest our entry into the Iraq war; the police penned them so closely as to call to mind a corset yanked tight on democracy.The Police Department now runs long rows of cars through the streets, lights blinking. We’re told it scares terrorists. It certainly rattles New Yorkers.“I’m struck by how insecure the security makes me feel,” says Mary Perillo, another resident of Cedar Street.It’s as if we’re in a crouch and can’t stand up straight. Once our marathon was a joyous conga-like celebration of New York in its hallucinatory glory. Poles in Greenpoint handed out pirogies and Puerto Rican children in Harlem sprinted alongside runners. Not after Boston. It was police officers, metal gates, dogs and more police officers.As my colleague Juliet Macur wrote, it was as if the race had morphed into a “26.2-mile crime scene.”Our security obsessions offer a lunatic sideshow down Broadway from ground zero. There stands the “Charging Bull,” that bronze and virile image of Wall Street unchained. It stands behind steel police fences.Every day and night since Occupy Wall Street, two officers guard that bull. Last week, I saw a couple of fellows from my 70th Precinct in Brooklyn; this weekend the officers hailed from a precinct on Staten Island.Neighbors say that during Hurricane Sandy, as the city shuddered and fell dark, officers remained at their posts, guarding that bronze bull.I don’t mean to sound glib. I watched those towers collapse and that cloud of cement and biomass and God knows what rolled over me. I coughed for months and that was the least of it. Fear crawled in and curled up in a corner of my cranium.In 2001 I walked through Central Park on a chilly December afternoon, winter’s sun and shadow in play. I peered at our skyline and my mind’s eye saw a jetliner descending into grand prewar buildings. It took several minutes to shake that image.Yet we healed.Rich Roth worked for the Secret Service and has evaluated the stockade plan for Lower Manhattan for the plaintiffs. He isn’t impressed.“You want to be 100 percent secure? Nothing can do that,” he says. “Nothing they’re doing prevents an airliner from coming down. Nothing prevents someone from setting off a bomb outside the Empire State Building.”Mr. Scherzer nods at this. He knows the terrible is possible. “I don’t think the cops have a bad motive, not for a minute,” he says. “But to remain New Yorkers, we cannot live with security as our highest value.”Live too long in fear’s shadow and all becomes darkness.