WASHINGTON — An aviation commander for the Navy was raped by a co-worker, but there was no prosecution and the female accuser was denied re-enlistment. A noncommissioned officer was assaulted by a captain, who was found guilty but then granted clemency without explanation.Both cases come from the victims’ accounts, and as in all military criminal cases, the person in charge of deciding whether to prosecute and whether to uphold a conviction was a senior commander — the boss — of the accused.As Washington grows increasingly alarmed about sexual assault in the military, lawmakers of both parties and in both chambers of Congress are moving to introduce legislation seeking to prevent and to better prosecute abuses. President Obama has expressed fury over the issue and this week the administration asked lawmakers to the White House to discuss the legislation with Valerie Jarrett, a senior adviser to Mr. Obama.Embarrassed military officials have repeatedly pledged that they are working to stop the abuse; a Pentagon survey released Tuesday estimates that 26,000 people in the armed forces were sexually assaulted last year.But they are largely opposed to what many experts and lawmakers believe is a crucial step toward reducing assault and more effectively punishing abusers: the reversal of a centuries-old policy stemming from English law that gives commanders the power to decide whether and how an offender should be tried.The policy comes from a time before there were military judges and a court-martial appeals process. Unlike civilian judges, a military commander decides who gets prosecuted for what crimes and at what level of severity. The commander who convenes the court-martial picks the jurors who will hear the case and after trial must approve or disapprove findings of guilt and sentences.“We have a system partly from the 20th century and partly from the 18th century,” said Eugene R. Fidell, who teachers military justice at Yale Law School. Commanders believe “as an article of faith that they must have the power to decide who gets prosecuted.”Victims and their advocates say that such a process serves as a disincentive for reporting sexual assault because victims fear and often experience retribution from their peers and superiors and are not given the due process civilians receive.“Placing the fate of a case with one person from beginning to end is illogical, it’s not practical and it also is a completely unjust system in which neither the victim nor the accused is well served,” said Anu K. Bhagwati, the director of the Service Women’s Action Network.Next week, Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand, Democrat of New York, will introduce legislation — certain to be controversial at the Pentagon — that would modify the current system by giving military prosecutors rather than commanders the power to decide which cases to try. The legislation would also abolish a commander’s post-trial powers.“It’s essential that we do this,” Ms. Gillibrand said. “This has been elevated to national consciousness.”She will seek to include her bill in the coming defense authorization act. Should that fail, it will be up to Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader, to bring it to the floor as a separate measure. The effort will be uphill. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel, who appeared shaken and embarrassed by the findings released this week, has expressed an openness to changing the part of the system that allows commanders to overturn convictions and modify sentences. But in a Pentagon news conference on Tuesday, Mr. Hagel remained opposed to the idea of taking military justice out of the chain of command, saying that would have a negative impact on good order and discipline.“It is my strong belief that the ultimate authority has to remain within the command structure,” he said. The matter is certain to be hotly debated by the Senate Armed Services Committee.Some Republican lawmakers agree with Mr. Hagel.“The military’s a unique place; it’s not a democracy,” said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, at a recent hearing on the matter. “When it comes to good order and discipline of a command, we have generally held the view that the one person that has the power to determine good order and discipline — and to make sure it’s present — is the military commander.”But outrage over the increasing numbers of sexual assaults, detailed in the Pentagon survey released Tuesday, along with the low percentage of those cases that result in court-martial, has reverberated across party lines.Senators Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington, and Kelly Ayotte, Republican of New Hampshire, have introduced legislation that would provide victims of sexual assault with a special military lawyer and would change some of the procedures for courts-martial in the case of sexual assault charges.“We believe that chain of command needs to change,” Ms. Murray said Wednesday during a Senate appropriations hearing as she and others grilled Gen. Mark A. Welsh III, the Air Force chief of staff, about how sexual assault is prosecuted. “We don’t want to be sitting here 20 years from now with the same statistics.”Many lawmakers would also like to see an end to the process that permits senior officers to overturn a jury conviction in a sexual assault case.In the House, Representatives Michael R. Turner, Republican of Ohio, and Niki Tsongas, Democrat of Massachusetts, have sponsored legislation that would strip an officer’s authority to change or dismiss a court-martial conviction in major cases, like sexual assault, and require that an individual found guilty of rape, sexual assault and some other offenses be either dismissed or dishonorably discharged.In addition, Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, is considering legislation that would require the Coast Guard to better comply with laws permitting victims of sexual assault to transfer away from the geographic location of their alleged attacker.“If I were a parent with a daughter who is thinking of going into the military today,” Ms. Collins said  during the hearing on Wednesday, “I would think twice about whether the environment is safe for her, not from the enemy, but from sexual assault from her fellow military members.” Virtually all of the modern military allies of United States — Britain, Canada, and others — have removed the prosecution of military crimes from commanders, relying instead on military prosecutors.According to another Pentagon study made public this week, the military recorded 3,374 sexual assault reports last year, up from 3,192 in 2011. In both years, fewer than one in 10 sexual assault courts-martial produced convictions. Most cases resulted in minor administrative punishments or were dismissed altogether. The study also found that 62 percent of victims said they faced retaliation after reporting an assault.Several senators, including Ms. Collins, would like to see automatic dishonorable discharges for anyone convicted of such crimes while serving. Currently, those military members convicted of sexual assault are often permitted to remain in the armed forces.