WHO SAID GIRLS CAN’T JUMP?In the early 1980s, when my two daughters were 6 and 8, they jumped with the boys under their coach, Karl Eid, in Anchorage. Our older daughter outjumped the men on the larger hill and was featured on local TV. Finding small Nordic skis and gear was tough then, and both started jumping on their alpine skis. With no other girls joining them, they both moved on to soccer year-round and still enjoy recreational skiing. I knew the day would come when female ski jumpers would make the jump to the Olympics. I’m proud of this team. DICK OVENS, Brighton, Colo., posted on nytimes.comIt’s distressing to read that there is yet another sport that seems to encourage eating disorders — in men and women. I would like to see the sport attract more strong, muscled women like Lindsey Van (who overcame an eating disorder) and fewer “kites” (like the 94-pound Sarah Hendrickson) — especially because many young women will see them as role models. BARBARA CROOK, Ottawa, posted on nytimes.comHOW IS HAMID KARZAI STILL STANDING?Hamid Karzai’s longtime rival and critic, Dr. Abdullah Abdullah, was right about Karzai having “energy and tactical skill” and that “he is also one of the greatest actors Afghanistan has ever produced.” Karzai is cunning and clever. As a narcissist, he doesn’t want to go down in history as a modern day Shah Shuja. He’s fooling himself by denying the reality on the ground: nepotism and corruption. It’s not true that the Afghans want a “Karzai dynasty.” No doubt Hamid Karzai will not retire after he steps down. William Dalrymple can already start a new book: “The Return of a President.” JACQUELINE VON HETTLINGEN, Switzerland, posted on nytimes.comKarzai has been consistent in his desire to end the terrorism of the Taliban and the Inter-Services Intelligence agency of Pakistan within his country. He also wants to see that Afghanistan becomes a relatively normal democracy. The problem is that American policy makers have been unreliable partners. Perhaps, unlike many American-appointed leaders around the world in the last five decades, Karzai is his own man. ANUP KUMAR, Cleveland, posted on nytimes.comCASEY AFFLECK SHOULD BE MORE FAMOUSMaybe Casey Affleck would be happier in theater than in film. If you love acting and experimentation but are resistant to the absurd elements of fame, theater is a natural place to go. Perhaps he should be following the model not of his brother but of Philip Seymour Hoffman, John Malkovich and Willem Dafoe. RACHEL CAREY, Cranford, N.J., posted on nytimes.comTHE LOST MARINES OF TARAWAI was 11 years old in 1956, living on Guam, where my father, a Navy doctor, was stationed. Guam had been the site of a terrible, monthlong battle in which more than one thousand American Marines and sailors and nearly 18,000 Japanese combatants died. The battle for Guam ended 12 years before my family arrived. But a short hike in any direction from where we lived gave evidence of the struggle: live ammunition, abandoned fortifications, skulls, femurs, vertebrae, ribs. We left them all where they lay. So I wonder what motivates a man like Mark Noah. The dead haven’t summoned him. Is he motivated by compassion? If so, for whom? While survivors may be comforted when some remnant of a lost family member is found and returned, it seems to me that that relief comes at a price paid by the fallen who are covered by the tropical undergrowth of remote Pacific islands. Uninvited men sever a final reconciliation of enemies in death. They have been at peace with each other for more than 70 years. TERRANCE A. MEADOR, San DiegoWHAT DOES CANCER SMELL LIKE?For more than 5,000 years Chinese medicine and many other “alternative” approaches have used smell as a diagnostic tool. This is more of a “catch-up” for modern medicine than a discovery. PHILLIP ELTON COLLINS, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.MOTÖRHEAD’S JIMMY KILMISTER: ‘I’M PAYING FOR THE GOOD TIMES’“Lemmy is such a salty bastard. This interview rules.” @GrimKim, via Twitter