KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia — Malaysia’s governing coalition won a majority of parliamentary seats in national elections on Sunday after the largest turnout in the country’s history, but a bitter coalition of opposition parties claimed that the result was tainted by illegal voting and other irregularities.The country’s election committee announced early Monday that the governing coalition had secured the 112 seats needed for a simple majority, enabling the next Parliament to re-elect Prime Minister Najib Razak in the coming days.But Mr. Najib and his National Front coalition, which has governed the country since it gained independence in 1957, could lose at least 10 seats in the 222-member federal Parliament.While final results were not yet available, analysts said the government would ultimately win about 130 seats. The People’s Alliance, a three-party opposition coalition led by Anwar Ibrahim, 65, a former deputy prime minister, will gain ground, but it still fell far short of its goal to unseat a government that has ruled unchallenged for 56 years.“We have a big agenda for the people of Malaysia, and we intend to fulfill our commitment to the people of Malaysia,” Mr. Najib said on national television minutes after the commission’s announcement.The 15-day election campaign was bitterly contested and marred by violence and opposition charges of vote-rigging. For many, the campaign began five years ago after the opposition posted its best showing by winning 82 seats to deny the governing coalition a two-thirds majority in Parliament for the first time since the 1960s.Mr. Anwar’s campaign accused the government of deploying tens of thousands of “phantom voters,” including foreign laborers from Bangladesh, Indonesia and Myanmar who work in eastern Malaysia, to vote using illegal identity cards. The opposition threatened to organize protests if the final results pointed to fraud.“There is specific evidence, of names of foreigners voting as military personnel,” Mr. Anwar said shortly before the governing coalition was declared the winner. He said in a post on Twitter early Monday that there were “phantom voters witnessed in my own constituency as well as around the country.”The opposition also complained that the election commission was not independent, that irregularities were detected in early voting by 200,000 police officers and military personnel, and that the indelible ink applied to voters’ fingers to prevent them from casting multiple ballots could be easily wiped off.“There are still certain issues that bear further examination,” said Ibrahim Suffian, the director of the Merdeka Center, an independent polling organization. “Although the evidence that had been presented by the opposition was very selective, there were questions about illegality related to today’s vote, the advanced voting and the postal voting. Those issues all needed to be examined.”The government and the National Front denied charges of vote-rigging. Mr. Najib said Mr. Anwar could appeal the election results but warned against street demonstrations, calling on the opposition to respect the results.“We have to show to the world that we are a mature democracy,” Mr. Najib said. “Whatever the decision, we must respect the will of the people.”When polls opened across Malaysia on Sunday morning, the race was too close to call between the opposition and the 13-party governing coalition, which is dominated by Mr. Najib’s United Malays National Organization. Mr. Anwar, the former deputy prime minister, is also former senior leader of the organization.The electorate was divided along racial, geographic and generational lines and was presented with a stark choice: maintain a semiauthoritarian government responsible for economic growth or vote for a combative but untested opposition promising huge changes.The race came down to about 20 of the 222 seats, Mr. Ibrahim said. He said the returns indicated that the majority of Malay voters, who account for about 60 percent of the country’s 29 million people, had swung their support back to the governing coalition.The biggest winner in the opposition alliance was the Democratic Action Party, according to preliminary results. While the Democratic Action Party has a multiracial membership that includes Malays and Indians, it is overwhelmingly Chinese.Mr. Ibrahim said the election showed a “sharpening of the ethnic discussion with the strengthening of the Chinese vote.”Malaysia has 13.3 million registered voters, including 2.6 million first-time voters, and turnout was a record 80 percent, according to the election commission.Nurul Izzah Anwar, 32, the daughter of Mr. Anwar, successfully defended her seat in Parliament even though she said that 4,600 names on the voter rolls in her constituency could not be confirmed as real. Mr. Anwar also retained his seat in the northwest state of Penang, but at least three members of Mr. Najib’s cabinet lost their seats.Mr. Najib acknowledged that his governing coalition had lost ground, saying that Malaysian voters were swayed by aspects of the highly emotional campaign in a country where elections were never competitive until 2008.He offered an olive branch to the opposition with a call for national reconciliation.