ROME — He is not a member of Parliament or one of the 1,007 grand electors who selected a president on Saturday.But for a growing number of Italians, Beppe Grillo, the charismatic founder of the antiestablishment Five Star Movement, is the leader who best represents their desire for change and their anger toward political parties they believe are obstructing political reform.On Sunday, one day after a majority of the electors re-elected President Giorgio Napolitano, 87, to a rare second term, Mr. Grillo denounced the re-election as a “cunning little institutional coup,” meant to preserve the political status quo and to gain time. “They are stealing a year,” he said.Antonella Mariniello, a telephone operator, was one of the many hundreds of Mr. Grillo’s supporters who heeded his call to flood Santi Apostoli Square in downtown Rome on Sunday afternoon to express their dismay at the tactics behind the election. “He’s right. The parties schemed an agreement, the oppositions went hand in hand,” she said. “It’s a disgrace.”Saverio Di Rosa, an engineer, said he was attending his first protest because “I just don’t feel represented.”“Napolitano isn’t the best man in this moment, people want change, and they don’t see anything new in Napolitano,” he said.The square was so packed on Sunday afternoon that Mr. Grillo was unable to make his way past a scrum of photographers and reporters and into the mass of admirers. So he climbed up on a car and gave an impromptu — if uncharacterically short — address. Referrring to Italy’s lawmakers, he said, “Give yourselves up!”Mr. Napolitano, who commands respect at home and abroad, easily won re-election with more than 700 votes. Political leaders from Italy’s traditional parties had implored him to stand for a second term when it became clear that no candidate was likely to win a majority after two days of voting.Italy still does not have a government eight weeks after national elections, but the agreement over the president suggests that a government with multiparty support can be formed. The Italian Parliament is split into three antagonistic voting blocs.Mr. Napolitano is now expected to nominate a candidate for prime minister who will try to form a new, broad coalition government, which must be approved by Parliament. If Parliament rejects his candidate, he could dissolve its two houses and call new elections, but he has said he would like to avoid that. Italian newspapers on Sunday put forward former Prime Minister Giuliano Amato or Enrico Letta, a Democratic Party official, as possible candidates for prime minister.But there is no guarantee that a government can be formed. There are many detractors within the very parties expected to back it, and in any case the government would probably be short-lived, content to pass a few nondeferrable reforms. The situation has become more dicey after the implosion of the Democratic Party, the strongest party in Parliament, which failed to negotiate a viable political solution during five weeks of negotiations. The entire leadership of the party resigned Friday and Saturday.“The applause in Parliament that erupted when Napolitano was elected — that wasn’t for the president. The politicians were applauding themselves” for finding a way to stay in office longer, Mr. Grillo said at a rambling, two-hour news conference in Rome on Sunday morning.“But the format of political parties is over,” he said, overcome by the participatory democracy his movement promotes. “The parties are imploding, not because of Grillo but because it’s history.”In February, the Five Star Movement won 25 percent of the national vote on its first foray into national elections, and recent opinion polls have shown support for Five Star growing. Elections in the northeast Friuli-Venezia Giulia region this weekend are being closely watched to gauge the party’s popularity.Five Star Movement Parliament members have ruled out future accords with any government that might emerge from negotiations, to begin this week. The party is preparing to pursue its battles — for a new electoral law, for a minimum salary for all citizens, for anticorruption legislation — as the opposition.Mr. Grillo, who is the voice and face of the movement, has won support by distancing himself from the current crop of Italian lawmakers, whom he disparages as a privileged caste who have lost touch with the daily problems many Italians face.“Politicians live in their world but there is no dialogue with the rest of us, they don’t understand real problems,” said Michele Dresda, a salesman for herbal products who came out to Santi Apostoli Square. He said he hoped to leave Italy because the economic situation was so dismal. “I pay all my taxes, but see few results,” he said.