Elizabeth Monroe Meeker Jensen and William Henry Huttinger were married Saturday at St. Sophia Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Los Angeles. The Very Rev. John Bakas, the dean of the cathedral, performed the ceremony, with the Very Rev. Spencer Kezios, a Greek Orthodox priest, taking part.The bride, 27, is keeping her name. She is an associate in wealth management in Los Angeles with JPMorgan Chase. She graduated from Connecticut College and received a master’s in economics from American University. She is a daughter of Sarah Meeker Jensen and Dr. J. Arthur Jensen, both of Santa Monica, Calif.The groom, 28, known as Henry, is studying for a law degree at the University of California, Los Angeles. Until March, he was an assistant program officer at the National Endowment for Democracy in Washington. He graduated from the University of Edinburgh in Scotland. He is the son of Elizabeth O. Huttinger and Frank J. Huttinger of Pasadena, Calif.The couple met in Los Angeles in 2007 at a Christmas party organized by Ms. Jensen’s mother, who had invited Mr. Huttinger’s family.“I didn’t know who this family was,” Mr. Huttinger said. “I was just kind of dragged along.” But Ms. Jensen knew who he was. She was a friend of Mr. Huttinger’s two sisters, and was aware that during the summer, he had traveled with friends to Turkey, Syria, Jordan, Egypt and Israel.“It was love at first sight,” she said. “I really admired his sense of adventure, the fact that he had been in the Middle East. I was also very attracted to him physically.”Mr. Huttinger said: “We hit it off right away. I thought she was engaging and beautiful.”After Ms. Jensen graduated in May 2008, she traveled with Mr. Huttinger to Cairo for nine months while he took a yearlong fellowship sponsored by the United States government to study Arabic at American University.“Cairo was a good bonding experience because I had to rely on him for my day-to-day activities,” she said. “He spoke the language and I didn’t, but I felt very comforted in his company.”Shortly after they returned in 2009 — she arrived in April and he followed in July — Ms. Jensen began studying for her master’s and Mr. Huttinger began working at the National Endowment for Democracy, which required him to travel to Egypt and Libya to help develop programs to support democratic societies.“Seeing him go into dangerous areas to do something, which might not be appreciated by the ruling government, gave me many moments of anxiety,” Ms. Jensen said. “I had already thought about planning a life with him — I loved him.”Over the next three years, while still pursuing her master’s, Ms. Jensen worked as a research assistant at the Aspen Institute in Washington.In July 2012, Ms. Jensen moved to Los Angeles to take another job. Last March, Mr. Huttinger joined her there after being accepted to law school.“She had always sacrificed to be with me,” he said. “Now I was lucky enough to go where she was, and getting back to living together was just a great feeling.” VINCENT M. MALLOZZI