MIAMI — Six months after Florida became the butt of late-night jokes for a chaotic voting process that bedeviled the 2012 presidential election, the State Legislature passed a bill on Friday to remedy many of those problems.Gov. Rick Scott and Republican lawmakers made overhauling the election system a priority this year. Their push to change the law — a redo on a much-criticized bill passed in 2011 — was a response to waits of hours by voters in several counties and a flawed early voting program.In Miami-Dade, the county with the longest lines, some people waited six hours to cast their ballots; others voted after Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee, had conceded to President Obama.“Let’s put ourselves out in front of the nation on this issue,” said Representative Jim Boyd, a Sarasota Republican who spearheaded the bill in the House.On Friday, the House voted 115 to 1 and the Senate voted 27 to 13, with Democrats in the minority, to send the bill to Mr. Scott. The governor, a Republican, is expected to sign it into law. The bill increases the number of early voting days and sites, allows voters to correct an absentee ballot with a missing signature and shortens the length of constitutional amendments on the ballot.It was drafted with the cooperation of the state’s 67 election supervisors, who warned Republicans in 2011 that the changes in the law then would gum up the system on Election Day. A number of the law’s provisions faced legal challenges.“We have a product here that — while all may not agree, for whatever reasons — I believe is a good product,” said Senator Jack Latvala, the Republican who shepherded the bill through the chamber. “I believe it’s a substantially better system, with more opportunities available for folks to cast their ballots, than any time in the history of Florida.”But Democrats in the Legislature were divided over their support of the bill. House Democrats supported it, viewing it as an important step toward fixing the problems created by the 2011 law.“It takes men and women of maturity, when you’ve done something in error, to come back and correct it,” said Representative Darryl Rousson.Senate Democrats, though, called the bill a missed opportunity. They feared it gave supervisors too much discretion on early voting, did not free up enough new locations for early voting and made it more difficult to distribute absentee ballots.“Elections are something that affect all of us and should affect all of us equally,” said Senator Christopher L. Smith, the Democratic leader. “I feel that, as we move forward, there can be unequal access to the ballot box.”The vote comes as other states grapple with how best to hold elections. Many Republican-controlled legislatures passed measures in 2011 that cut early voting days and required state-issued identification cards to vote. Some, like North Carolina, continue to move in that direction. Others, like Florida and Colorado, are taking the opposite tack.“Florida is one example of what we are seeing in a number of states,” said Diana Kasdan, senior counsel for the Brennan Center for Justice’s Democracy Program. “Although there are still these restrictive bills coming down the pike — that has not gone away — the new trend that we are seeing is positive legislation.”The bill also changed Florida’s early primary date to conform with new national Democratic and Republican Party rules. This year, Florida jumped toward the front of the line and held its primary at the end of January. The leap violated party rules and cost the state many of its delegates at the conventions, a loss Florida Republicans saw as a trade-off.But, after the national Republican Party recently stiffened penalties for such line-cutting, threatening even more delegates, the Legislature opted on Friday to move the date once again. The primary will be held on March 1, 2016. United States Senator Marco Rubio made the suggestion to House Republicans, who slipped it into the election bill, a Senate aide said. Democrats supported a return to a later primary date.Many of the breakdowns on Election Day stemmed from the 2011 bill that was passed by Republican lawmakers and signed by Governor Scott. That bill truncated early voting, changed provisional-ballot rules and stiffened rules on voter registration.With a record number of Floridians — 8.4 million — turning out to vote, the long waits were compounded by the size of the ballot. There were 11 wordy constitutional amendment proposals, on top of local measures. Some counties also had shortages of equipment and staff. And restrictions on early voting sites made it hard to curtail wait times.The problems were most evident in five counties, including some of the state’s largest; supervisors in those counties were criticized for mishandling the election. Generally, minority voters encountered the most problems, according to researchers who studied the issue.The bill approved on Friday would require at least eight days of early voting but would give local election supervisors the choice to permit 14 days of early voting, with up to 12 hours of voting a day, if needed. No county is required to open the polls on the Sunday before Election Day, the so-called Souls to the Polls days when many minority voters traditionally turn out to vote, but election supervisors can do so if they wish. Some have already said they would open that day.Another significant change is that voters who forget to sign their absentee ballots would have an opportunity to fix their mistake before Election Day. Thousands of unsigned ballots were invalidated in 2012.“Based on what the Legislature prescribed today, I think this is going to be a great service to voters,” said Brian Corley, the Pasco County elections supervisor who worked with lawmakers on the bill. “A lot of the issues of 2012 will be addressed.”