PARIS —  What is left for Europe’s mainstream center-left?Socialist and social democratic parties that shaped the protective European social model and ruled much of the Continent a decade ago have been among the chief political casualties of the financial and economic crisis since 2008. More than just a cyclical trough, this may be a longer-term decline, because the left has lost its political narrative.Polling evidence shows that many young and blue-collar voters, angry about mass unemployment and government spending cuts, have deserted to protest parties of the anti-capitalist hard left or the euroskeptical, anti-immigrant far right, as the political landscape fragments.Others trust middle-of-the-road conservatives like the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, more than the left to run the economy in tough times. And some have simply stopped voting out of disillusionment.Most worryingly, for a movement born in the 19th century of organized labor’s struggle for better working conditions and living standards, the belief in collective social progress has lost much of its credibility in mature advanced economies. Income inequality has increased across the West since the crisis began, according to figures from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, widening social gaps that the left set out to close.“Social democracy nowadays basically amounts to the defense of the status quo and preventing the worst,” said Olaf Cramme, director of Policy Network, a study group for progressive center-left politics.Germany’s opposition Social Democrats have just recorded their second-worst election result since World War II. They now face an ugly choice between entering a “grand coalition” under Ms. Merkel on unequal terms; staying out and seeing her possibly team up with the Greens, the Social Democrats’ natural partner; or being punished by voters at a rerun election.Socialists or social democrats still head 13 of the 28 European Union governments and are in coalition in five others, but they are often driven to pursue unpopular policies that hit the interests of their own electorate.“It is an extremely difficult balance,” the Danish prime minister, Helle Thorning-Schmidt, a Social Democrat, said in an interview. “We had some reforms that have been seen as quite harsh, but they have also been necessary.”“I think we have found the right formula — not to be popular, because we have not actually reached that yet — but to do the right thing for the country,” she said.Austria’s Socialists lost votes last month, though they remain the largest party. Italy’s center-left Democratic Party, which now heads a shaky left-right coalition, bled votes to the anti-establishment 5-Star protest movement in a February election and is riven by factional squabbling. In Greece, Ireland and Spain, center-left parties are paying a high price for having supported public pay and pension cuts required by international creditors.In Britain, the opposition Labour Party is still distrusted because it presided over a deregulated financial market bonanza that ended in the crash of 2008, wrecking the reputation for economic competence built by the prime ministers Tony Blair and Gordon Brown.In France, one of the few countries with an absolute center-left parliamentary majority, the Socialist president, François Hollande, is deeply unpopular as his government dithers between old-style tax-and-spend policies and half-hearted welfare and labor market reforms, satisfying no one.With mainstream party membership and funding dwindling in many countries, the center-left has rarely kept pace with new vectors of political action via social media and grassroots initiatives.Some of the center-left’s woes may be temporary. When voters tire of center-right governments’ implementing austerity policies, and scandal and attrition in office take their toll, the pendulum may swing back to the mainstream opposition.But the center-left can no longer offer much prospect of a rosier future through state intervention. There are fewer fruits of economic growth to redistribute, globalization continues to exert downward pressure on wages and working conditions in developed countries, and the demographics of aging societies with shrinking work forces make welfare benefits and pensions ever harder to sustain.Compounding the left’s problems, some conservative leaders like Ms. Merkel and the Swedish prime minister, Fredrik Reinfeldt, have successfully occupied the middle ground.Ms. Merkel “has taken any political polarization away by reverse-engineering the social democratic Third Way strategy,” said Henning Meyer, editor of The Social Europe Journal. “Similar to what Tony Blair and Gerhard Schröder did in the 1990s and 2000s, she has adopted the most popular policies of her opponents — at least rhetorically.”Ms. Merkel embraced the phasing out of nuclear power, increased public spending on child care and family benefits and offered a watered-down form of a minimum wage to neutralize the center-left. A lurch to the left did not help the Social Democrats regain much ground, since core voters are still angry about painful reforms in the past decade that cut unemployment benefits and raised the retirement age, even though these measures are now credited with restoring German competitiveness.Reformers like Mr. Cramme of the Policy Network argue that the only salvation for the left lies in emphasizing “pre-distribution” through investment in child care, education and job training, rather than perpetuating blanket welfare handouts.“Defending acquired rights may be legitimate, but it no longer makes you a catch-all people’s party,” Mr. Cramme said. “If you want to be a big-tent party again, you will have to combine reformist elements with social protection.”This leaves the center-left with awkward choices. Its big battalions of supporters tend to be among public employees and unionized industrial workers with strong job protection and secure pensions who fear privatization, and resist easier hire-and-fire regulations and later retirement.In some North European countries like Denmark, social democratic parties have pinned their fate on embracing an open, globalized economy and making social protection more selective.“We are trying to do four things at the same time,” Ms. Thorning-Schmidt said, drawing four points on a piece of paper.“Fiscal constraint — call it austerity,” she said. “On the other side, growth measures. Then social welfare for the most in need and the restructuring of our welfare model.”Paul Taylor is a Reuters correspondent. 