TUNIS — With a brazen hail of bullets, gunmen assassinated a prominent opposition leader on Thursday as his family watched, inciting nationwide outrage and exposing a deepening political divide in Tunisia, the last bastion of relative stability among the Arab countries convulsed by revolutionary upheavals over the past two years.The assassination of the opposition leader, Mohamed Brahmi, was the second time in five months that a leading liberal politician was fatally shot. Many suspected that Islamist extremists were responsible and warned that they threatened the kind of pluralistic democracy envisioned in Tunisia’s 2011 uprising, which inspired the Arab Spring revolutions.Hundreds of demonstrators gathered in front of the Interior Ministry building, blaming the ruling Islamist party and its followers for Mr. Brahmi’s killing and shouting for the government to go. Scores of relatives, party members and supporters draped in the Tunisian flag arrived at the entrance of the hospital in the southwestern suburb where Mr. Brahmi’s body lay.Tunisian news media accounts said Mr. Brahmi, 58, had been shot outside his home, an attack witnessed by his wife and children, in the middle of the day by two men on a motorcycle who escaped. Although the accounts of the precise version of events differed, the audacity of the assassination amplified the outrage, as many Tunisians feel the government has failed to deliver on law and order and allowed radical Islamists a license to act with impunity.Mr. Brahmi’s daughter told the Mosaique FM radio station that her father had received a call on his cellphone, ran outside the house toward his car and was shot.Ennahda, the moderate Islamist party that leads the government, denied responsibility and condemned the assassination as a plot to derail Tunisia’s democratic transition.The assassination has hit Tunisia at a moment of growing political tension. Two years after the revolution that ended the dictatorship of President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and empowered Ennahda in parliamentary elections, opposition to the Islamists has been building. Leftist and democratic parties have accused it of inefficiency and of prolonging its mandate illegally.Invigorated by events that overthrew the Islamist government in Egypt three weeks ago, they have increasingly demanded that the government resign and set a date for elections. Youth groups, including a Tunisian version of Egypt’s Tamarrod, or Rebellion, which was instrumental in the ouster of Egypt’s Islamist president, Mohamed Morsi, have begun organizing. The trade union movement, which played a large role in the revolution, called for a general strike on Friday in protest of the killing.Like their counterparts in Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood, Ennahda members had little experience running a country. The party was banned under the former government, and its members spent years in prison or exile. Ennahda leads a coalition with two smaller secular parties and has struggled to complete the drafting of a new Constitution and prepare elections within the allotted one year.The party has nevertheless been commended for its inclusive politics and a postrevolutionary maturity missing not only in Egypt but also in the other Arab Spring upheavals in Libya, Syria and Yemen. Ennahda negotiated a compromise on the Constitution, dropping all mention of Islamic law, for example, and ensuring full freedoms, including equal rights for women, freedom of religion and expression.At the same time, Ennahda has disappointed its own supporters and angered the more extreme among them.The overthrow of the Islamist-dominated government in Egypt gave the government here a new sense of urgency. Members of the National Constituent Assembly have been meeting daily throughout the holy month of Ramadan to agree on a final draft of the Constitution and are close to approving a new board to run elections.Yet the most serious challenge for Ennahda has been controlling the extremists among its followers.Ennahda has long been criticized for allowing what the opposition calls a growing Islamization of the country, and a tolerance of extremist groups: Salafis and jihadis who were recruiting young men to fight in Syria, and groups preaching fundamentalist views and threatening women who worked outside the home or went unveiled.Ennahda members, including ministers and the party leader, Rachid al-Ghannouchi, have played down signs of violent extremism and encouraged supporters to engage in the democratic process. Yet among those followers were thousands of men with guerrilla experience, whether in Afghanistan with the Taliban and Al Qaeda, or in neighbors such as Algeria.Days after the attack in September 2012 on the United States diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya, that killed the ambassador there, J. Christopher Stevens, a crowd attacked the United States Embassy in Tunis, burning more than 100 vehicles and looting the adjacent American school. Abu Ayad, a Tunisian leader of the Salafi group Ansar al-Shariah, is sought in connection with leading the attack. As the government detained 180 of his followers, the group threatened bombings in the cafes and streets of Tunis.The embassy attack was followed in February by the assassination of a liberal politician, Chokri Belaid, outside his home. That killing set off a strong public backlash against the government. The prime minister resigned, and Ennahda reshuffled the cabinet, appointing a new interior minister who led a crackdown against criminal groups. In May the government moved against Ansar al-Shariah, banning its annual gathering and suppressing riots in a Tunis suburb. Ennahda members, despite internal sympathy for some of the extremists, condemned the rioting. Even Ennahda’s critics acknowledged that the government was showing greater maturity.Voices on both sides of the political divide by Thursday evening were showing a determination not to let the assassination divert the democratic process. Mr. Ghannouchi called the assassination an attack on Tunisia.“This is a crime against the democratic transition,” he said. Ennahda called on all parties to show “responsibility and restraint at this sensitive time.”“It is not those in power doing this, but those who want to take us back, who have an interest in taking us to total disorder, even to civil war,” said Kamoun Lotfi, a teacher standing vigil at the hospital where Mr. Brahmi’s body lay.Mooman Fehri, a member of the opposition party Al Jomhouri and a friend of Mr. Brahmi’s, said he believed that the attack had been aimed at stopping the vote on the election board, which is close to completion. The board will be a powerful and legitimate body, and some opponents do not want it to go through, he suggested.Middle East scholars said Mr. Brahmi’s assassination now threatened to harden the views of Ennahda’s critics and Islamists who contend that Islamism and democracy are incompatible.“The danger of this is that it’s an attack on democratic institutions,” said George R. Trumbull IV, a history professor at Dartmouth College. “It has a potential to divide Tunisia into purely secular and purely Islamist poles and to further alienate Islamist supporters committed, at the moment, to the democratic process.”