“It’s your solo, take it away,” said the violist David Aaron Carpenter to the vibraphonist David Stevens during a recent rehearsal at a synagogue on Central Park West. Mr. Carpenter was directing the Salomé Chamber Orchestra in Lera Auerbach’s alluring “Sogno di Stabat Mater,” for violin, viola, vibraphone and orchestra, in preparation for a concert at the Metropolitan Museum.If Mr. Carpenter, 27, has his way, “It’s your solo” will be something he himself will hear more often. On May 11 at Carnegie Hall he will join the National Symphony Orchestra and Christoph Eschenbach in Alfred Schnittke’s Viola Concerto, a fine vehicle for his virtuosity and bold, rich tone.Mr. Carpenter, one of a new generation hoping to emulate the success of Kim Kashkashian and Yuri Bashmet, among the few violists to have sustained solo careers, also often performs with Salomé, of which he is also artistic director.“I was jealous of Yuri Bashmet and Gidon Kremer for having their own orchestras,” Mr. Carpenter said recently at the elegantly appointed home on Central Park West where he lives with his mother, Grace Carpenter, and his older siblings, Sean and Lauren Carpenter, both violinists. An intense and articulate trio, the younger Carpenters often finished one another’s sentences during a lively interview at their dining table, as they served pastrami sandwiches, fruit salad and cake.Salomé will appear on Saturday evening at the Metropolitan Museum, the last in its series of concerts performed on pieces from the Sau-Wing Lam collection of rare Italian string instruments. A conductorless string ensemble, the group began in 2009 as an unpaid collective featuring musician friends of the Carpenters. At that time, Lauren Carpenter, now 28, was working full time as an account manager at Google, and Sean Carpenter, 32, at a hedge fund. They soon decided to turn Salomé into a professional venture and began a formal audition process, with the violinist Joshua Bell an adjudicator one year.It has quickly become one of New York’s top young groups, a polished and spirited ensemble comprising recent graduates from the major conservatories, Yale and Princeton. After studying at precollege divisions of the Juilliard School and the Manhattan School of Music, the Carpenter siblings attended Princeton and majored in politics; Sean also holds a postgraduate degree in political theory from Cambridge.For the orchestra, they seek musicians “who don’t treat it as a job,” Lauren Carpenter said.“It’s so easy to find musicians in New York who make music because they have to,” she added. “It’s routine. We want to be with people who still have that passion, who are as excited as we are.”Salomé is collaborative, she said, but “obviously we don’t want it to be a complete democracy,” where “it becomes a headache for everyone.”Philanthropy is a major component of Salomé, which frequently performs charity concerts. Such events also offer the ensemble a chance to expand its mission of attracting new listeners.Scrolling on his phone, David Carpenter showed photos of a recent fund-raiser that Salomé helped create for the FEED Foundation, an event attended by celebrities, including Bill Clinton. “We will also have A-listers at our next gig,” he said, adding that it’s important to “bring the glamour back” to classical music.Ms. Carpenter, describing some of her ideas for eye-catching photo shoots, said: “A lot of people don’t realize how visual and physical music is. When I go to a concert, be it the New York Philharmonic or Beyoncé, I want more than one sense to be stimulated.”That is one reason the Salomé musicians perform standing, she added, “to encourage people to be much more communicative and physical when playing.” A recent YouTube video shows the charismatic David Carpenter gyrating like a willowy Elvis during a performance of the “Murka Variations” by Alexey Shor and Oran Eldor.Apart from looking for impeccable musicianship, Ms. Carpenter said, they also recruit a certain personality type for Salomé.“We’re all very clean-cut people,” she explained. “Some musicians are notorious for not being responsible, getting drunk all the time, not being pleasant. For us, making music is an honor, and we want to make music with people we respect and love. And there’s an intangible there. Like when you evaluate an instrument.”Evaluating instruments is also an area of expertise for the siblings. Salomé is financed in part by Carpenter Fine Violins, another family enterprise, which sells Stradivaris, Guarneris and instruments by other Italian or French masters. The Carpenters founded the business in 2010 and operate it from their home.Ms. Carpenter calls it the day job for her and Sean. She said she saw “huge opportunities” in the instrument market.“When you have ownership, and a part of something you helped create, it’s more empowering,” she said. “It falls within our orbit, connecting musicians with the patrons.”Sean Carpenter said that the first year was difficult. But “we had clients and proved that there was demand for it,” he added. Since the beginning of 2011, the business has brought in more than $50 million in revenue. “We also invest in art, but our comfort zone is instruments,” he said.The walls of the family home are decorated with paintings, including a newly acquired 1964 de Kooning. David Carpenter discussed his enthusiasm for art and showed his impressive renderings of sketches by Leonardo da Vinci and others.“It helps you as a musician as well,” he said. “People say you have to focus on one thing, but I completely disagree. If that was the case, I would get up on stage and know that the viola is the only thing I have to help me, so I’d be nervous all the time.”He is surprised when colleagues mention stage fright. “It’s a joy to be playing for people,” he added. “What better feeling can you have? I don’t understand it. I think it stems from teachers putting students down, and the competition.”While Sean and Lauren Carpenter focus on the violin business and Salomé, David, whose teachers include Yuri Bashmet and Roberto Diaz, is forging ahead with his solo career. Reviewing his 2007 concert at Weill Recital Hall, Allan Kozinn wrote in The New York Times that David Carpenter “faces a daunting career path” as a soloist.But David remains undaunted, although he expressed frustration that orchestras often reserve concerto opportunities for their principal violists instead of hiring outside soloists.“If you’re out of shape and playing an incredible number of works every year, and then you get up and play the Bartok Viola Concerto, that’s a mistake,” he said. “That’s not to put anyone down, as there are incredible principals out there.”He has released two CDs on the Ondine label, including one with Mr. Eschenbach and the Philharmonia Orchestra that features Lionel Tertis’s arrangement of Elgar’s Cello Concerto for viola, a showcase for his remarkably sonorous tone and passionate musicianship. It includes a potent rendition of the Schnittke Viola Concerto.Also on Ondine, David has released the premiere recording of recently discovered concertos by Joseph Martin Kraus, a contemporary of Mozart. Future projects include a performance of a transcription of Beethoven’s Violin Concerto with Salomé.“I try and shy away from chamber music or teaching,” David Carpenter said. “Maybe it’s an ego thing.”Ms. Carpenter gently corrected her brother, saying, “It’s a focus thing.”David added, “I want to widen the role of the viola as a solo instrument, as opposed to being that second citizen.”The dynamic Carpenter siblings certainly seem to be enjoying their various missions: connecting patrons and string players, finding new paths for the viola and using Salomé as a vehicle to attract new listeners. “It’s great,” Ms Carpenter said, “to try and change the face of what classical music concerts can be.”