GENEVA — For Thomas Minder, a decade-long crusade against “fat cats” is coming to a head.The Swiss are set to vote Sunday on whether to adopt his proposal to impose some of the world’s most severe restrictions on executive compensation. The prospect is opposed by the banks and other multinational companies that have long spearheaded Switzerland’s economy, who say the rules will damage the country’s business-friendly climate.Mr. Minder, an entrepreneur and member of the Swiss Parliament (with no relation to the reporter), has taken the opposite view.“If this gets voted, it will be the best export advertisement possible, because investors put their money where they have the most to say, and that will clearly then be Switzerland,” he said. The changes, he added, would guarantee that “investors will no longer have to worry about ridiculous backdoor deals.”If Mr. Minder’s proposal is adopted, shareholders of companies listed in Switzerland would have a binding say on compensation for executives and board members, and the plan would  obligate pension funds to participate in all such votes.Mr. Minder’s proposal would also ban departure packages like the $78 million payout that Novartis, the pharmaceutical company, agreed to give its departing chairman, Daniel Vasella. The payout set off a political storm and brought intense criticism from some investors, prompting Mr. Vasella to tell shareholders last week that the plan had been a mistake.Those who violate the new rules would be subject to fines worth as much as their salaries for six years and prison sentences as long as three years.The vote on Mr. Minder’s proposal comes after the United States and Germany, among other countries, authorized shareholders to cast nonbinding votes on executive pay. Such actions have been taken in response to Occupy Wall Street and other movements that have attacked corporate abuses that fueled the world financial crisis. On Thursday, the European Parliament proposed to limit bankers’ bonuses to twice their salaries.The latest opinion polls suggest that voters will endorse his project, and Mr. Minder said the Novartis controversy had illustrated exactly why tougher rules were needed.“There is something completely sick in a board like that of Novartis, where everybody is just friends with everybody,” he said. As to Mr. Vasella’s   U-turn, Mr. Minder said, “It’s easy to renounce something which should in any case never have belonged to you.”Still, Switzerland’s business lobby is warning of dire consequences if voters approve the proposals. While Switzerland is home to 7.5 million people, it punches far above its weight in economic terms, thanks largely to multinationals in sectors including banking, watches, food, pharmaceuticals and engineering. Many of these companies have most of their shareholding outside Switzerland.“Switzerland risks becoming one of the most restrictive places for management in the world,” said Meinrad Vetter, an official from EconomieSuisse, the Swiss business federation. For foreign companies, he added, Mr. Minder’s proposal would “clearly be a very bad signal in terms of choosing Switzerland as a location to do business, because Switzerland has in fact always been a country that had been seen as very business friendly.”Neither have many institutional investors endorsed the plan. The Ethos Foundation, based in Geneva, which is owned by 141 pension and other funds, recognized that Mr. Minder had pinpointed a genuine problem in Switzerland in terms of weak shareholders’ rights. But Mr. Minder’s proposal would push Switzerland “from one extreme to the other,” said Christophe Hans, head of communications at Ethos.Mr. Hans also warned that Mr. Minder’s proposal could create a new set of managerial problems.“You cannot give the board the right to choose the C.E.O. but then not make it able to finalize the hiring contract,” Mr. Hans said. “Which employee, let alone a C.E.O., would accept a job offer without first having the salary guaranteed?”And even if companies are unlikely to leave Switzerland in droves if voters approve Mr. Minder’s initiative, “some family-controlled companies would delist,” Mr. Hans predicted.While Mr. Vasella and Novartis have focused recent attention on the issue, much of Mr. Minder’s criticism is aimed at the Swiss banks whose earnings and shares have tumbled in recent years, even as the rest of the Swiss economy has remained relatively unscathed by the financial crisis.Mr. Minder said bankers like Marcel Ospel, the former chairman of UBS, had brought to Switzerland “the wrong and harmful banking spirit,” learned while previously working on Wall Street. Five years ago, Mr. Minder had to be restrained by Mr. Ospel’s bodyguards when he tried to storm the podium at a UBS shareholders’ meeting.Mr. Minder also suggested that Switzerland’s growing reliance on foreign executives had helped inflate compensation. He cited as an example Brady Dougan, an American banker who took charge of Credit Suisse in 2007 and has been among the top earners in Switzerland.“I want Swiss people on the boards of Swiss companies, not foreigners with the wrong culture,” he said. The difference, Mr. Minder said, is “whether you believe money is everything or whether you can also understand that Switzerland has direct democracy and a sense of balance.”Two other possible Swiss referendums are looming, both linked to salary issues.One concerns setting a minimum wage and the other is a so-called 1 for 12 initiative, to ensure that the top salary in a company does not exceed the lowest one by more than 12 times.If Mr. Minder’s initiative is rejected Sunday, Swiss voters will still automatically be approving a government counterproposal, which would give shareholders a vote on executive pay, though not necessarily a binding vote. Mr. Minder, however, warned that this alternative would not “prevent in any way backdoor deals.”At the top of Mr. Minder’s list of such deals is the one a decade ago that brought about his personal fight against what he terms rip-off merchants. His family-owned business, Trybol, which supplied toothpaste, mouthwash and other body care products to Swissair, found itself holding the bag when the Swiss flag carrier ran out of money in 2001.Swissair had decided to pay its new chief executive, Mario Corti, 12 million Swiss francs  in advance when he was hired in 2001. Mr. Corti then left his job and Switzerland for the United States shortly after Swissair’s grounding in October 2001. A Swiss court eventually acquitted Mr. Corti and other former Swissair directors of any mismanagement charges. Even so, the fact that Mr. Corti never returned the wages he had been paid upfront “should still be seen as criminal,” Mr. Minder said.Mr. Minder eventually received the money he had been owed by the airline  and then stepped up his campaign against what he considers excessive executive compensation. He gathered increasing public support after the onset of the world financial crisis, which also exposed management failures at UBS and other leading Swiss institutions.Mr. Minder portrayed his campaign as “a fight for the people” against the behemoths of Swiss business.“Many millions have been spent to defeat me,” he said. At the same time, he would not disclose how much he had spent on his own campaign, nor any financial data related to Trybol.Such financial transparency, he said, should apply only to listed companies.