ARLINGTON, Va. — Myrlie Evers-Williams, the widow of the slain civil rights leader Medgar Evers, said her husband was a man who saw a job that needed to be done, and he answered the call, “not just for his people but for all people.”Ms. Evers-Williams and a group of about 300 visitors, including Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. and former President Bill Clinton, observed the 50th anniversary of Mr. Evers’s assassination on Wednesday at Arlington National Cemetery, where Mr. Evers is buried.Mr. Evers was working as a field secretary for the N.A.A.C.P. when he was gunned down in the driveway of his home in Jackson, Miss., on June 12, 1963, at the age of 37. Byron De La Beckwith, a white supremacist, was convicted of the murder in 1994, 30 years after two all-white juries deadlocked on earlier charges.The anniversary comes as the Supreme Court prepares to issue rulings on voting rights and affirmative action, as a divided Congress considers overhauling the nation’s immigration laws, and as the White House faces political turmoil at home and upheaval abroad.Mr. Clinton said that Washington could learn from Mr. Evers.“The next time you hear people complaining around Washington about what a rough business democracy is, we might do well to remember what it was like 50 years ago, and the sacrifices that were made,” he said.He added: “Fighting for a world we can share instead of having to agree to let somebody else control it has always been a highly dangerous proposition. It is expensive in blood and life.”Other speakers included Ray Mabus, the secretary of the Navy and a former governor of Mississippi, and Benjamin Todd Jealous, the president of the N.A.A.C.P.Mr. Evers was the N.A.A.C.P.’s first field officer in Mississippi. In that role, he organized voter registration drives, economic boycotts, demonstrations and investigations to draw attention to discrimination. He was best known for his investigation of the 1955 murder of Emmett Till and his failed bid to enroll in the University of Mississippi’s law school.Mr. Evers served in a segregated Army unit in Europe during World War II. After returning to Mississippi in 1945, he joined the civil rights movement as a co-founder of the Regional Council of Negro Leadership, where he organized a boycott against gas stations that did not allow blacks to use their restrooms.Before the Supreme Court declared the doctrine of “separate but equal” unconstitutional in Brown v. Board of Education in 1954, he applied to the law school at the University of Mississippi and was rejected. He later helped James Meredith become the first black person admitted to the university in 1962.His actions drew threats from white supremacist groups, and his wife and civil rights leaders encouraged him to leave Mississippi. He stayed. Later that year, he became the N.A.A.C.P.’s first field secretary in Mississippi.“While African-Americans were the obvious beneficiaries of his life’s work, in a real sense he set us all free,” Mr. Mabus said. He added, “The Mississippi that my children grew up in is a far more just, far better place, than the Mississippi in which I was raised because of Medgar Evers and Myrlie Evers and so many others like them.”