NEW DELHI —  The half brother of a former leader of the Maldives appears to have won that country’s runoff election for president on Saturday, defeating a popular favorite and ending a tumultuous voting process halted three times by court orders.With nearly all the votes counted, Abdulla Yameen led with 51.8 percent of the vote, said Masood Imad, a spokesman for the departing president, Mohammed Waheed Hassan. Mohamed Nasheed, who won the country’s first contested election in 2008, trailed by four percentage points, Mr. Imad said.Mr. Yameen, also known as Yameen Abdul Gayoom, is the half brother of former President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom.The election commission will confirm the results on Sunday.This fall’s tortured election process laid bare lasting tensions between the political old guard, represented by Mr. Yameen, and groups backing Mr. Nasheed, who is known for his activism on climate change issues.The democratic transfer of power in 2008 was hailed as a turning point for the Maldives, a chain of islands in the Indian Ocean with about 350,000 people. Mr. Gayoom, who was criticized for using authoritarian tactics during 30 years in power, surprised many by stepping aside to make way for Mr. Nasheed, saying that “my legacy is going to be introducing a modern, liberal form of democracy.”But Mr. Nasheed crossed swords with the country’s top judges when he set out to investigate abuses by officials. Mr. Gayoom’s loyalists protested, and Mr. Nasheed resigned in 2012, describing what had happened as a “coup d’état.” Though he was once again the favorite in this fall’s presidential election, the process was halted repeatedly by the police and the judiciary.The Supreme Court, seen by many as loyal to Mr. Gayoom’s circle, scuttled the results of a first round of voting, based on complaints about voter rolls. It then derailed a planned election in October, when the police surrounded the election commission’s headquarters in response to a court order. The court also delayed a second-round vote.