BEIJING — “Have you noticed how woman opinion leaders are being called ‘Mr.’ on Weibo?” asked my sharp-eyed friend Mei Zhang, referring to the influential Twitter-like microblogs.She was right.In scattered online references subsequently confirmed in interviews, the evidence is there: “Liu Yu Xiansheng,” or Mr. Liu Yu, a Tsinghua University politics professor and the respected author of “Details of Democracy,” an admired book about the years she spent in the United States. In February, “Mr.” Liu, 37, gave birth to a daughter, so calling her “xiansheng”  seems especially odd. She has more than 780,000 followers on Sina Weibo, the biggest microblogging platform in the country.“Xiansheng” is the most common way to address a man today in Mandarin, replacing the gender-free “tongzhi,” which began to fade in the 1980s, after the death of Mao Zedong. Once upon a time, “xiansheng” also indicated a teacher (more on that later). It means “first born” and expresses respect for a person older, and therefore more venerable, than yourself.Ms. Zhang, who was born in Shenyang but works in Hong Kong in finance, explained: “Historically, when a woman was called that, it really elevated her to the status of a man. It meant a brilliant woman. Not because she was pretty but because she was really respected, really clever.“As a woman you have to be really outstanding to be called it, whereas if you are a man it can be anybody,” she said.Lu Pin, of the Beijing-based Media Monitor for Women Network, agreed. “Why should a woman be called a man just because she’s clever?” she said, sounding bemused at the very thought. “Why does she have to be a man to be respected?”I met Ms. Liu for lunch to ask how things were going as a new mom — and a man.Looking fresh, if a little rounder than I remembered from our last, prebaby meeting, her reaction wasn’t indignation at this transformation of her gender, but surprise that she should be called “xiansheng” while only in her 30s.“I think it’s funny, and quite sad, because mostly only old women are called that,” she said, looking slightly uncomfortable with the question. Answering it required acknowledging that she is held in high esteem, and that is embarrassing in a culture that places importance on appearing modest.“I think when you are called ‘xiansheng’ it’s about how people see you,” she said. “They think I’m an intellectual, I’m respected, and I suppose they like me.”Feminist linguistics, which examines how women are described in language and highlights the gender biases embedded in it, has not been deeply explored in China, meaning that awareness may be low, said David Moser, a Chinese-language specialist and a director of a Chinese studies program at Capital Normal University in Beijing.“I think it’s a little bit off the radar,” he said.In other words, even feminists aren’t watching out for this stuff, though women are represented in a colorful and wide range of derogatory ways in Chinese. “Xiansheng” undoubtedly isn’t the worst.The very character for woman, “nu,” is an ideogram that suggests submission: a kneeling person with her hands clasped before her, according to Li Leyi, a scholar, in his “Tracing the Roots of Chinese Characters: 500 Cases.” Some think her hands may be bound, though Mr. Li doesn’t confirm that.In contrast, the character for man, “nan,” shows a field and a plow. (The latter became the standalone word for “power.”) Then there is “yao,” meaning goblin or devil, which contains the character for “woman.” So does “traitor,” while a sinister smile and plot — yes, they have a woman in them, too. The long list includes many hoary proverbs and sayings: “Brothers are your hands and feet, a woman your clothes,” meaning that she is inessential and can be changed. “A woman is a mule who can be ridden and beaten,” is another.There are other female “misters,” like Yang Jiang, 102, a writer along with her husband, Qian Zhongshu,  and Zhang Yihe Xiansheng, the author of “The Past Is Not Like Smoke,” a powerful memoir of her democratic father and his colleagues who were destroyed by the Communist Party after it seized power in 1949. She has more than 370,000 followers on Sina Weibo.Then there are famous, deceased female “misters”: Bing Xin, a celebrated children’s author, and  Wang Guangmei, a politician and the wife of Liu Shaoqi, a president of China.Bing Xin’s daughter, Wu Qing, a former deputy to a local Beijing congress, is sometimes addressed as “xiansheng,” even though, she said in a telephone interview, she doesn’t deserve it.For Ms. Wu, the word’s ancient meaning of “teacher” is more relevant than its contemporary meaning of man; it can be understood as a gender-neutral accolade. “I think it can be a good thing,” she said. Young people may not understand that it once was a traditional form of respect for all, she suggested.Ms. Lu, the feminist, pooh-poohed that. After all, in olden times all teachers were men, and either way, today, she said, xiansheng “has become a male thing. Totally.”A quick, unscientific poll of friends and colleagues drew a uniform reaction: it signifies “man.”For Mr. Moser, these deep language structures operate on conscious and subconscious levels, showing enduring, patriarchal attitudes.Chinese linguistic insults to women are legion, but the subconscious ones interest him the most because they are the most insidious, he said.For example, a person with a doctorate — a “boshi” — is a man, unless you specify she’s a woman, in which case she’s a “nu boshi,” he said, noting that Chinese is not the only language that exhibits this bias and that it extends to a range of professions.“The male is always the generic and the female is the special case,” he said.“In English we have made some strides” toward eradicating bias, but things are backsliding, he said. “The use of ‘Ms.’ is kind of dying out or going back a bit,” he said, pointing also to the fact that many women in the West still change their surname to their husband’s.“It’s so common to say, ‘you guys’ when it’s males and females,” he said.Sometimes, a woman just has to be one of the guys — like Mr. Liu Yu, Mr. Zhang Yihe and Mr. Wu Qing.