“Unlike almost any other classical performer of recent times, Leonard Bernstein adamantly, and sometimes controversially, refused to compartmentalize and separate his emotional, intellectual, political, erotic and spiritual longings from the musical experience,” Jonathan Cott writes in “Dinner With Lenny: The Last Long Interview with Leonard Bernstein” (Oxford University Press, $24.95).Mr. Cott, a contributing editor at Rolling Stone, then delivers exactly what his title promises, though dinner turns out to be an understatement. It is like referring to a chef’s tasting menu as fast food.The 12-hour marathon conversation took place in 1989, the year before Mr. Bernstein died, with the ebullient composer and conductor ranging across subjects from breast-feeding to the Black Panthers. The feast, originally abridged in Rolling Stone but here running 165 bountiful pages, left this reader hungry for more.At the end of the evening, Mr. Bernstein puts on his favorite of his own recordings: Beethoven’s C-sharp Minor Quartet, op. 131 with the Vienna Philharmonic in 1977.Amid commentary on the music, Beethoven and the conductor’s art, Mr. Bernstein fights off the suggestion that it has gotten too late: “You should hear the opening fugue. One more glass of wine, Jonathan, and we’ll listen to the fugue,” Mr. Bernstein continues, “and then it’s a night.”●Gridlock? Blame John Randel Jr.Same goes for jaywalking, interminable avenue blocks, and every other scourge of New York’s right-angled geography.In “The Measure of Manhattan” (W.W. Norton, $26.95), Marguerite Holloway offers up a well-deserved biography of the chronically aggrieved and litigious visionary who codified Manhattan’s street grid early in the 19th century, mapping out regular blocks all the way to the wilds of West 155th Street.With relatively few exceptions, she writes, “New York City flowed into that form, like batter flowing into the grooves of a waffle iron.”Professor Holloway, who teaches at Columbia’s Graduate School of Journalism, deftly weaves surviving fragments of Randel’s life (his lawsuits and ailments are the most heavily documented) with a 21st century scavenger hunt by modern geographers to find the physical markers of his work.Unfortunately, the book’s diminutive black-and-white illustrations do not do their subject justice. And two mysteries still endure: Where is Randel buried? And why are certain crosstown streets, chosen without explanation, wider than others?●Just last week, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg warned (in response to protests over a Brooklyn College forum critical of Israel) that people who wanted government to police academic speech should go to school in North Korea. Such gusto for teachers’ freedom of conscience was not always found in City Hall. Marjorie Heins, a civil liberties lawyer, casts a gimlet eye on New York schools in the early 1950s, when teachers were fired merely for refusing to say whether they were communists.“Priests of Our Democracy: The Supreme Court, Academic Freedom and the Anti-Communist Purge” (New York University Press, $35) recounts the legal victories for civil liberties that, in most cases, came too late to repair lives and careers shattered by suspicions, largely unproven, that left-wing teachers were indoctrinating a generation of red-diaper babies.Of course, some teachers actually were communists (and not all priests are perfect). But Ms. Heins’s point, which she places in historical and contemporary context, is that “the American political system is all too vulnerable to political repression and to demonizing the dissenter.” She makes a powerful case, although the reader is left wanting to know more about the personal fates of her defrocked subjects.