DAKAR, Senegal — Radical Islamists in northern Nigeria have killed seven foreign construction workers who were kidnapped in February, a significant escalation of extremist violence in Nigeria’s continuing jihadist insurgency.The killings were announced Saturday by an obscure splinter group, Ansaru, and confirmed by European foreign ministries on Sunday. The seven — an Italian, a Greek, an Englishman and four from the Middle East, including Lebanon — were seized on Feb. 16 from the compound of Setraco, a Lebanese construction company operating in Nigeria’s Bauchi State, in a well-planned nighttime assault. A grainy photo released by the group showed a gunman standing by a number of corpses.The deaths signal a shift in tactics by the radical Islamists who have been battling the Nigerian government for nearly four years in the country’s impoverished north. The Islamist group Boko Haram has previously attacked, for the most part, officials and institutions associated with the federal and local authorities, though plenty of civilians have been killed along the way.It was those civilian deaths that led some in Boko Haram to reject the group around the time of a bloody assault in the major northern city of Kano in January 2012 in which dozens were killed. The renegades formed a new faction, Ansaru, which appears to have adopted methods more in the style of Al Qaeda, including kidnapping Westerners who work in the north and not hesitating to kill them.A statement from the group Saturday blamed Nigerian news reports — inaccurate as it turned out — that British military aircraft had arrived in the country for a rescue operation. Britain’s Defense Ministry said it had flown planes to the Nigerian capital, Abuja, to support military operations in Mali, with which it has been involved.The Nigerian authorities were characteristically silent on Sunday about the killings, which were denounced by the British foreign secretary, William Hague, as “an unforgivable act of pure coldblooded murder.” But analysts in the country suggested they were part of a shift in the grinding Islamist insurgency, which the Nigerians have been unable to quell. And, they said, the killings were bound to have a dampening effect on Western development and construction initiatives in the north, the poorest region of Nigeria.“This is a major turning point in terms of the numbers killed,” said Kole Shettima, the chairman of the Center for Democracy and Development in Abuja. “It will upset many activities in the northern part of the country, especially those supported by philanthropic organizations, multilateral and private organizations,” Mr. Shettima said, adding that a number of Western companies were involved in construction and agricultural activities in the north.The February attack, which led to the kidnapping of the seven whose deaths were just announced, was sophisticated. Gunmen first attacked a prison, then seized control of the compound belonging to Setraco, dynamiting a protective wall to gain access; a security guard was killed. On Jan. 20, Ansaru — whose full name is Jama’atu Ansarul Muslimina fi Biladis Sudan, or Vanguard for the Protection of Muslims in Black Africa — attacked Nigerian soldiers on their way to Mali, killing two. In December, a French engineer was kidnapped in Katsina State, after 30 gunmen attacked his company’s compound.In a video announcing the killings, an Islamist with a young man’s voice reads a statement in a monotone against the Islamists’ black flag; his face — as well as those of two gunmen flanking him — is entirely swathed in a head covering, except for a narrow slit for the eyes. The construction workers were killed, the man says, “because a soul of a single believer is more than the lives of thousands of unbelievers,” according to a translation by the SITE Monitoring Service.Together with previous kidnappings and killings by Islamists — a German engineer in Kano in January 2012, and British and Italian engineers in Birnin Kebbi in May 2011 — the newest episode is certain to lead to further isolation for northern Nigeria, a vast and problematic territory for the government.“It will further reinforce the problems the northern part of the country has been complaining about,” Mr. Shettima said.