SEOUL, South Korea — The South Korean National Assembly on Wednesday voted to allow the arrest of an opposition lawmaker on charges of plotting treason in a case that rekindled fears of a pro-North Korean rebellion and concern about the actions of a powerful intelligence agency that has been long accused of meddling in domestic politics under the pretext of hunting Communists.The lawmaker, Lee Seok-ki, a member of the minor United Progressive Party, is accused of gathering 130 followers, some of them drunk and with small children, in two secret late-night meetings in May to plot an armed rebellion in support of the North in case of war. North Korea heightened military tensions earlier this year by declaring that it would no longer honor the 60-year-old cease-fire that halted the Korean War in 1953.In one of the meetings, which lasted till 2 a.m. on May 13 at a religious retreat in the South Korean capital, Seoul, Mr. Lee, 51, said war could be imminent on the divided Korean Peninsula and his followers should prepare themselves for a “revolution” against “the world’s most powerful American imperialists” and achieve “a new reunified fatherland,” according to the National Intelligence Service’s charges against him.At one point, he said the manual for making the pressure cooker bomb used in the Boston Marathon attack was available on the Internet. According to the charges, one of Mr. Lee’s followers reminded the others that during the Korean War, the South Korean authorities arrested and executed tens of thousands of leftists out of fears that they would collaborate with the North Korean Army. The man, Hong Soon-seok, was quoted as saying that if there were another war, a similar fate could befall South Korean leftists, “as Jews were once rounded up.”Another follower, Lee Sang-ho, suggested attacking South Korea’s communications, oil, train and other crucial facilities in case of war, the charges said. But Mr. Hong also called the idea of buying sniper rifles and using hacking skills to attack military radar facilities “outlandish.”Mr. Lee and his followers also face separate charges of violating South Korea’s anti-Communist national security law when they sang North Korea’s “revolutionary” propaganda songs during four political gatherings last year. Mr. Hong and Lee Sang-ho were arrested last week.“Lee Seok-ki is an enemy of South Korea,” said Kim Jin-tae, a lawmaker from the governing Saenuri Party, calling on fellow legislators to support a bill authorizing the arrest of Mr. Lee on Wednesday.By law, a legislator can be arrested with parliamentary approval when the National Assembly is in session.“This is a medieval witch hunt,” Mr. Lee told the Assembly, denying hatching a plot to overthrow the South Korean government through an armed rebellion and accusing the intelligence agency of “mobilizing conservative news media” to discredit him and his party.In an earlier news conference, he called himself a pacifist and urged his fellow lawmakers to reject the bill, quoting a phrase often attributed to the 18th-century French philosopher Voltaire: “I disagree with what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it.”Lee Jung-hee, the head of Mr. Lee’s progressive party, said the intelligence agency cited excerpts and distorted the context of the comments made during the May meeting to support its treason charges. The talks of sabotaging state facilities were “like jokes and were laughed away,” she said.“If this is treason, we are living in a society no one can dare crack a joke,” she said. “You cannot punish someone for what he thinks.”But Mr. Lee found few friends in the Assembly, and the bill was passed by a vote of 258 to 14, as the main opposition Democratic Party also decided to approve it, although it warned the national intelligence agency against McCarthyism, in a reference to the American senator who pursued suspected Communists in the 1950s. Later Wednesday, intelligence agents took him to a court hearing, where a judge was to decide whether to formally arrest him.Mr. Lee is the first lawmaker to face treason charges since democratically elected leaders replaced the country’s past military dictators, who often used treason charges to silence and even execute dissidents, later exonerated in retrials.Mr. Lee’s case — and the timing of the National Intelligence Service’s raid against the homes and offices of Mr. Lee and his followers last week — have rocked the country for days, setting off charges from the opposition that the spy agency is resorting to its old trick of concocting espionage cases and threats from North Korea to divert attention from domestic political crises and calls to curtail its power.The case comes amid heightened concern over the actions of South Korea’s intelligence apparatus. Won Sei-hoon, a former head of the spy agency, now stands trial on charges of ordering a team of agents to begin an online smear campaign last year against government critics, including presidential candidates who ran against Park Geun-hye, who was then the governing-party candidate and is now the president, in December.Opposition lawmakers said the powerful spy agency’s alleged interference in the election was a bigger threat to democracy than the plot Mr. Lee’s small group is accused of.Although many South Koreans criticized and ridiculed Mr. Lee, calling for his punishment, others raised questions about what constitutes a treason plot and how freely people can talk about North Korea in the South, where the government blocks access to North Korean Web sites and people are still arrested for resending Twitter posts of North Korean propaganda materials.Chin Jung-kwon, a political commentator whose Twitter account has more than 360,000 followers, compared Mr. Lee and his followers to “inmates in a madhouse” and “Don Quixotes arming themselves.”Kim Young-hwan, a member of the main opposition Democratic Party, called the treason charge against Mr. Lee “a third-rate comedy.”“Who in South Korea will be influenced by the anachronistic rhetoric of the United Progressive Party?” Mr. Kim said.Mr. Lee and many members of his party are former student activists accused of subscribing to North Korea’s ideology of juche, or self-reliance. They criticize South Korea’s military alliance with the United States as well as the American military presence in their country. Their conservative enemies accuse them of stressing cooperation with North Korea while ignoring the North’s human rights violations and nuclear and military threats.Critics say Mr. Lee and the National Intelligence Service actually need each other, with the agency’s scandal bolstering the ability of progressive politicians like Mr. Lee to stoke antigovernment sentiments while the agency uses cases like Mr. Lee’s to defend itself from charges of meddling in domestic politics.“Lee Seok-ki and his like are nothing but a delusional religious cult,” Kim Ky-baek, publisher of the nationalist Web site Minjokcorea, said in an interview. Mr. Kim sued Mr. Lee and his progressive colleagues last year on charges of treason. “But the corruption of the conservative establishment that has been in power in South Korea for the past five decades, and the people’s disillusionment with it, gave room for the North Korea followers like Lee.”