THE Brooklyn documentarians Audrey Ewell and Aaron Aites were watching live online as Occupy Wall Street started its ill-fated march over the Brooklyn Bridge. It was October 2011, and “there was this crazy drama unfolding,” Ms. Ewell said. “All of a sudden everybody is being arrested — and then the guy who was filming it said his batteries were running low, and the screen went black.”Ms. Ewell turned on the television. “There was absolutely nothing,” she said. “No coverage of 740 people being arrested on the Brooklyn Bridge.” So she and Mr. Aites, who had made “Until the Light Takes Us,” about Norwegian death metal, took their cameras to Zuccotti Park in Lower Manhattan. “We’re not part of the movement, but we were interested, and there was this experimental aspect that appealed to us,” Ms. Ewell said. “What would happen if you took their sort of diffuse processes and turned them into a really goal-oriented project?”The result of that experiment, “99%: The Occupy Wall Street Collaborative Film,” will have its premiere at the Sundance Film Festival next Sunday. It is one of three films at this year’s festival, along with the Arab Spring documentary “The Square“ and the Tea Party documentary “Citizen Koch,” that are racing to catch up with rapidly evolving social movements. The level of difficulty of all three films is extraordinary. At a time when digital filmmaking makes it easier to speed the news into theaters, it’s also harder to keep pace with it. Each of these films faces the challenge of describing a diverse social movement that’s still coalescing. They don’t readily present central leaders or particularly coherent messages.“For a filmmaker it’s always a question of: What are your assets and what is the narrative approach that you want to take when you want to tell a story about something as diffuse, in a way, as a movement?” said Cara Mertes, director of the Sundance Institute Documentary Film Program, which supported all three films. “Each of these actually take different narrative strategies in order to bring you into a narrative about something that is quite disparate, quite complex.”In “The Square” Jehane Noujaim, whose credits include the Al Jazeera documentary “Control Room,” tries to makes sense of the sprawling Arab Spring movement by focusing on Egyptian activists in Tahrir Square. “Jehane actually uses Tahrir Square as a geographical location, but it’s her central character,” Ms. Mertes said. “You get to know several characters, but only in relationship to that geography.”In “Citizen Koch” the directors Carl Deal and Tia Lessin take the pulse of the Tea Party by focusing on David H. Koch and Charles G. Koch, the billionaire brothers who financed Americans for Prosperity and FreedomWorks. “They use a third kind of angle, a follow-the-money approach,” Ms. Mertes said.The Occupy Wall Street film is the most experimental, as Ms. Ewell and Mr. Aites tried to mirror the consensus-building, nonhierarchical democracy of that movement. The title cards announce, “The film you’re about to see was made collaboratively by more than 100 filmmakers and newcomers across the United States.” The unusual credits read, “A film founded by Audrey Ewell and Aaron Aites,” and go on to list two other directors, Lucian Read and Nina Krstic, and five co-directors: Katie Teague, Peter Leeman, Aric Gutnick, Abby Martin, and Doree Simon.“They actually tried to cut a film that resembled the process of the movement itself,” said John Cooper, director of the Sundance Film Festival.Shortly after the protesters’ clash on the Brooklyn Bridge, Ms. Ewell sent out an open call. “We started off with the basic idea that anybody was welcome, experienced filmmakers would lead the project, and we wouldn’t make propaganda,” she said over coffee in a cafe in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. The filmmakers were inundated with volunteers. A list-serv soon became unmanageable. An anarchist activist hijacked their Facebook page. “We had hundreds of e-mails every day,” Ms. Ewell said, “from people who were like, ‘I think we should start working on what bands are in the movie.’ ”“That was the most popular topic,” Mr. Aites agreed.The two were able to coordinate an outline for the documentary via e-mail before killing off the list. “We ditched the consensus process wholesale,” Ms. Ewell said, “and it actually turned into the strictest hierarchy imaginable because it was complete and utter chaos without it.”Instead they focused on reflecting the diversity of the movement. “The biggest way we thought we were mirroring the movement was actually not so much about the consensus process,” Ms. Ewell added. “It was about the idea that people from all walks of life all over the country would have a voice in the final film.”Much like the Occupy Wall Street protesters, who organized into specialized affinity groups, Ms. Ewell and Mr. Aites divided contributors into subgroups by geography and issue: economic disparity, the media, student debt, protests and home foreclosure, as represented by a single mother’s situation in Minneapolis. The process involved assignments and the arduous task of reviewing more than 18 terabytes of submitted digital video. But Ms. Ewell said the film was not crowdsourced: “When people hear that, they think it’s going to be 90 minutes of YouTube.”Much like the movement the film took shape according to who volunteered — and who disappeared. “Despite their terms that there are no leaders, there were very clear, identifiable leaders in the movement,” Ms. Ewell said. “It’s who keeps showing up. And it’s the same idea with our film.”It’s no accident that the tension between democratic access and goal-oriented expertise becomes a theme in the film itself, as people argue that Occupy Wall Street’s horizontal structure prevents it from making a greater practical impact.“They need a production manager,” Ms. Ewell said, “to get that thing whipped into shape.”Mr. Aites said, shrugging: “I don’t know. They did what they did.”Ms. Ewell replied, nodding in agreement: “I know, I know. I’m imposing other values on them — and that’s what we try not to do too much of.”