BEIJING — The man in camouflage fatigues raised his Kalashnikov rifle and fired three shots into the air while trudging through a field of purple and yellow flowers.He told the person filming him that after reading the works of Sayyid Qutb, the modern Islamist theorist, he had gone to study in Libya and witnessed the revolution there. Then he traveled to Syria to help overthrow the government of Bashar al-Assad, which he said “is butchering every Muslim here in cold blood, including children and women.”He spoke in Mandarin. He called himself Yusef, but a subtitle in English said his Chinese name was Bo Wang. On the surface, he appeared to be an extremely rare — perhaps the only — example of an ethnic Han citizen of China joining a jihadist group in the Arab world.The bizarre video first got the attention of some Chinese last week, when it was posted on YouTube and then on Youku, a popular video-sharing site in China. It was quickly deleted from there, possibly by censors aware that the material was too delicate for the sensibilities of Chinese officials. In the video, the man told the Chinese government to drop its support of Mr. Assad or “all Islamic countries of the world will unite to impose economic sanctions against the Chinese government.”China and Russia have blocked Western members of the United Nations Security Council from authorizing the use of force to intervene in the increasingly bloody Syrian civil conflict, and China has repeatedly said that foreign nations should engage in dialogue with Mr. Assad to resolve the crisis rather than exercise military power.It was not possible to verify the authenticity of the video, which was posted on YouTube on March 17 by a user named ayahm84, and then on Youku by someone using the handle of “Bashar al-Assad.” But two people with contacts in Syria said they had heard of the Chinese rebel fighter, and the green landscape in the video closely resembles that of northern Syria.There have been few, if any, cases of ethnic Han taking part in a jihadist movement in recent times. The Han are the dominant ethnic group in China and generally do not follow Islam. The two most prominent Muslim ethnic groups in China are the Hui and the Uighurs, who complain of discrimination by ethnic Han and by the Han-dominated Communist Party. Under the administration of President George W. Bush, 22 ethnic Uighurs from China captured by American forces in Afghanistan were sent to Guantánamo Bay, but they were later deemed by officials not to be enemy combatants.“We’ve of course heard of American and other Western converts fighting alongside jihadis,” said Bruce Hoffman, a professor at Georgetown University and a former RAND Corporation analyst who studies insurgencies and terrorism. “I know of no Han Chinese, though. I would imagine that Chinese officials, given their perennial concern about the spread of radical Islam into western China, will not be pleased with this development.”The Chinese Foreign Ministry said it did not have immediate comment.The video, which runs for three minutes, 26 seconds, opens with the chanting of an Islamic anthem and title cards showing white text on black background. The title screen says in Arabic: “The Mujahedeen Brigade in the Land of Sham,” which is another name for Syria. More text says the video is a “message to the Chinese people” from the “media division of the mujahedeen in the land of Sham.”Images show the armed Chinese fighter walking through a forest with evergreen trees and stepping over flowers and stones. He carries a Kalashnikov in his right hand, then fires it.The rest of the video shows him perched against a stone in the field with a bayonet fixed to his rifle, which is pointed outward, as if at an unseen enemy. He speaks to the camera, without a distinctive regional accent. To his right is a black flag with white writing.The fighter briefly introduces himself and then lashes out at Mr. Assad. “People have no freedom, no democracy, no security and no respect here, not at all,” he said.He goes on to speak of 1,400-year-old ties between the Chinese and the Arabs, stretching to the time of the Prophet Muhammad and the Tang dynasty, when the Silk Road thrived. “However,” he says, “now the Chinese government has destroyed that traditional friendship between the Chinese and Arab people” because Chinese leaders, along with their Iranian and Russian counterparts, “sell weapons and provide financial assistance to the Assad government.”There has been some discussion of the video on Chinese-language forums, though several of the original posts have been deleted. A post on one forum that remained online this week called the man “a brain-poisoned youth blind to right and wrong.”