The numbers are attention-getting: on Tuesday, New York City will spend about $13 million to hold a runoff in the Democratic primary for an office, public advocate, that is budgeted only $2.3 million a year. And the combination of a little-known post with a little-understood election process is expected to lead to startlingly low turnout — maybe 100,000 to 175,000 voters, in a city of 8 million people. Yet the election is likely to determine the occupant of one of the city’s top offices, because there is no Republican candidate.The high cost of an election for a low-cost office has inspired wags to muse. Some have suggested that the race be decided by a coin toss. Others, including the Republican nominee for mayor, Joseph J. Lhota, have joked that, because the public advocate has few concrete powers, the two candidates could be allowed to serve, at a saving to taxpayers.But some elected officials and government reform advocates have suggested a longer-term solution: instead of holding costly, low-turnout runoffs, New York City should switch to instant runoff voting, a system already used in other cities.In cities with instant runoffs, voters rank candidates by order of preference. If no candidate surpasses the minimum threshold to win an election, the last-place finisher is eliminated, and those votes are redistributed according to the preferences on the ballots. The process continues until a candidate crosses the threshold.Instant runoff voting is already used in Minneapolis, Oakland, Calif., and San Francisco, among other cities, in elections for mayor and other local offices. London uses a form of instant runoff voting in its mayoral elections. Ireland uses it for presidential elections, and Australia to elect its House of Representatives.In New York City, where runoffs are held in primaries for citywide offices in which no candidate gets at least 40 percent of the vote, some have been pushing for instant runoff voting for years. But this year’s race for public advocate has given the effort new momentum.Brian P. Kavanagh, a Democratic assemblyman who represents Manhattan and this year introduced legislation to implement instant runoff voting in citywide elections, said he had been getting calls from colleagues in recent weeks, asking to add their names as sponsors of the bill.“A lot of people are realizing it just doesn’t make any sense,” he said, adding, “I’m confident that we will be able to do this when we go back to Albany in January.”Two Democratic City Council members, Brad Lander and Gale A. Brewer, are also pushing for instant runoffs, proposing a voter referendum that would mandate the change. Their effort is supported by Citizens Union, a government watchdog group.“With so few New Yorkers voting, it means that narrow special interests who can mobilize voters control the outcome, and that’s not what New York-style democracy is about,” the executive director of Citizens Union, Dick Dadey, said. “It’s about allowing as many people as possible to have choice in who is elected to a citywide office.”Steven Hill, an author who is considered the architect of San Francisco’s instant runoff voting law, said that minority candidates had fared better in instant runoff elections. When the city held separate runoff elections — which took place in December because there are no party primaries for local offices — the voters who turned out tended to be white, and wealthier and older than those who voted in November, Mr. Hill said.“It leveled the playing field for the demographics that were being hurt by a low-turnout runoff,” he said.In New York City, the two Democratic candidates in the runoff primary for public advocate on Tuesday, Letitia James, a city councilwoman from Brooklyn, and Daniel L. Squadron, a state senator who represents parts of Brooklyn and Manhattan, have both expressed support for instant runoff voting.But the Democratic nominee for mayor, Bill de Blasio, who is the city’s public advocate, voiced some concern.“There’s a certain incompleteness to it — there’s a certain cursory nature to it that worries me,” Mr. de Blasio said in an interview on Friday.“I think it’s very important that people get to weigh their choices fully,” he said. “And, for example, if a seemingly less popular candidate ends up in a runoff, people would have another chance to really get to know that person. I want to think a little more about it.”Mr. Lhota joked about the cost of the runoff but was noncommital about instant runoff voting as a solution, saying through a spokeswoman only that he wanted to modernize the election system to make it more efficient.