
By the time I arrived in South Africa in 2008, a frail and declining Nelson Mandela was rarely seen in public anymore, and yet his presence was everywhere, his name on every set of lips and his face never far from any mind’s eye.        
He was the living symbol of the nation’s liberation, and people spoke of him as if he were the beloved grandfather always found at the head of the family dinner table — as if he were still somehow presiding over the future.        
I felt his hovering presence most greatly in April 2009, on election day. It was a chilly morning, and I waited with people preparing to vote in Diepsloot, a massive and impoverished squatter camp north of Johannesburg.        
They were celebrating their citizenship with patience. Many had begun their wait in the predawn, their shoulders covered with heavy jackets and blankets.        
One line pushed past Minguni’s Butchery all the way to the Gang Star Hair Salon. It then turned the corner for a distance at the offices of Dr. Dungu, the traditional herbal healer. Some people would wait for seven uncomfortable hours.        
These people were most certainly not voting their pocketbooks. Most were desperately poor, living in flimsy shacks without electricity or running water. Their prospects were dreary. They complained with anger at their government.        
They wanted change. And yet they were proudly loyal to the African National Congress, the same political party that had run that troubled government for the previous 15 years. It was, after all, the party of Nelson Mandela.        
The great man was president only from 1994 to 1999, and the position at the top had since gone to A.N.C. leaders with haunting and shameful flaws. But voters in a young democracy were still consecrating the memory of those who had sacrificed so much in the cause of freedom. They were beholden.        
“I always vote A.N.C. because of Nelson Mandela, and all he did for the struggle,” a young woman named Mary Jane Tyutula told me. “I won’t let him down.”        
Mr. Mandela, however addled and ailing, was an incomparable political card to play, none as high or wild. Just days before the election, the A.N.C. brought its white-haired icon to a rally in Johannesburg’s largest rugby stadium. He was chauffeured around the field in a golf cart, and then helped up the steps to a temporary stage, younger men using their hands as hoists under his arms.        
After each step, the old man paused to summon enough strength to attempt the next. He was taken to a sofa, and sat wordlessly through the rally, shaking hands with those who greeted him but otherwise barely moving except to sip water.        
On occasion, his face was displayed on a huge screen. Everyone understood the moment. This was among the final glances they would ever get.        
Some wept. Some cheered. And all tried to hold on forever to a hero vanishing into time.        
Barry Bearak was Johannesburg bureau chief from 2008 to 2011. 