ALBANY — A Republican state assemblyman unhappy with the way Gov.Andrew M. Cuomo pushed the Legislature to approve strict new gun laws said Tuesday that Hitler and Mussolini would have been proud of the governor’s actions.The comments, by Assemblyman Steven F. McLaughlin of the capital region, were immediately rejected by legislative leaders of both parties. Hours later, Mr. McLaughlin apologized for his statement.The stir began when Mr. McLaughlin spoke at a morning news conference where Republican legislators were describing a proposal to amend the State Constitution to prevent the kind of late-night voting that occurred last month during debate over the gun measure on the first full day of the legislative session.The Legislature has often voted on controversial proposals in the middle of the night; the gun measure was also expedited by Mr. Cuomo’s decision to allow the Legislature to bypass the three-day waiting period that is otherwise required between the introduction of legislation and a vote.“We’re told basically to shut up and vote, and that’s what this is all about,” Mr. McLaughlin said. “Just don’t question it, just vote. That’s basically the message here. If that’s not dictatorial, I don’t know what is.“Hitler would be proud. Mussolini would be proud of what we did here. Moscow would be proud, but that’s not democracy.”Asked by a reporter about the appropriateness of his comments, including his mention of Hitler, Mr. McLaughlin said he stood by what he said.“How does Putin act over in Russia?” he said. “Same thing. Dictate to the Legislature what they’re going to do. They’re rubber-stamping it. I’m not calling the governor a dictator; I’m saying that this was the dictatorial thing to do.”On Tuesday afternoon, Mr. McLaughlin released a video message in which he expressed regret for his comments, explaining that “sometimes, in the heat of the moment, you say things that you regret, and that’s what happened today.”“I made an analogy that I should not have made, and I’m very, very sorry about that,” he added. “I’ve called the governor to apologize. He did not deserve that.”The lawmakers’ proposal to curb expedited voting — one element of which Republicans floated last year after Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, pressed for another late-night vote — would limit the governor’s ability to waive the constitutionally required three-day waiting period before lawmakers could vote on legislation. It would also restrict the Legislature’s consideration of bills between midnight and 8 a.m.The Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, immediately condemned Mr. McLaughlin’s comment.“That comparison is highly offensive and beneath a member of the State Legislature,” a spokesman for Mr. Silver, Michael Whyland, said in an e-mail. “It is completely inappropriate and doesn’t belong in our public discourse.”The Senate Republican leader, Dean G. Skelos of Long Island, also rejected the comments.“As I reflect back, perhaps we did act in haste,” Senator Skelos told reporters. “But I also think that that type of language is inappropriate.”The gun measures approved by lawmakers include a significant expansion of the state’s ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines, as well as requirements to keep firearms away from people with mental illnesses and to impose stiffer penalties on gun crimes.