BRUSSELS —  After a series of nightlong crisis meetings on Cyprus, the European Union’s economic policy chief, Olli Rehn, remarked that his wife had started complaining that he spent more time with Christine Lagarde, the head of the International Monetary Fund, than with her.Throughout much of Europe’s seemingly unending economic crisis, Mr. Rehn and the I.M.F. chief have been an inseparable part of a curious policy-making ménage à trois known as the “troika,” a trio that also includes the European Central Bank.The tensions at the heart of this intimate but unwieldy arrangement, however, have now burst into the open with an unusual bout of finger-pointing over policies that have pushed parts of Europe into an economic slump more severe than the Great Depression and left the Continent as a whole far short of even Japan’s anemic recovery.The blame game, initiated by a highly critical internal I.M.F. report released this week in Washington, has put a spotlight on a question that has lurked in the shadows throughout the troika’s efforts to get a grip on Europe’s economic mess: Is it time for a divorce?Speaking Friday at an economic conference in his home country of Finland, Mr. Rehn, the usually phlegmatic commissioner of economic and monetary affairs, sounded like a put-upon spouse in a messy breakup. “I don’t think it’s fair and just for the I.M.F. to wash its hands and throw dirty water on the Europeans,” he said.He was responding to assertions by the I.M.F. that the European Commission, the union’s executive arm, had blocked proposals back in 2010 to make investors share more of the pain by writing down Greece’s debt and, more generally, had neglected the importance of structural reforms to lift Europe’s sluggish economy.Simon O’Connor, Mr. Rehn’s spokesman, said the report had made some valid points, but he derided as “plainly wrong and unfounded” a claim that the commission had not done enough to promote growth through reform. On this issue and events in Greece, Mr. O’Connor said, “We fundamentally disagree.”Left-wing politicians who have long denounced the troika as an alien and unaccountable force are muttering “told you so” and complaining that putting policy in the hands of a triumvirate of unelected institutions could never work.“The troika is constructed in such a way that it is untouchable, and that is the end of democracy,” said Udo Bullmann, a Socialist member of the European Parliament’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee from Germany and a strong critic of austerity measures that have formed the core of the troika’s policy prescription for Europe’s ailing economies.“What is this troika?” asked Mr. Bullmann. “It has no address and no telephone number. Who do you talk to?” He said the troika was designed to diffuse and thus dodge responsibility. “Decisions are made in a nontransparent and nondemocratic way so that nobody has to take the blame,” he said.Charles H. Dallara, a former United States Treasury Department official who represented the banking industry in negotiations with the troika over Greece, said that the I.M.F. and the European Commission were never as united as they often seemed and were bound to come to blows at some point.“It is very difficult to have three cooks in the kitchen all the time. That is just life,” said Mr. Dallara, who now works for a private equity company based in Switzerland. “You need one institution driving negotiations. You don’t need three.”The idea of yoking three together to address Europe’s troubles dates back four years to when it became clear that Greece, the weakest member of the 17-nation zone that uses the euro, would need a bailout to stave off bankruptcy. Northern European countries, particularly Germany, demanded that the I.M.F. play a role in order to share both the cost of a bailout and the blame for imposing tough terms.The triumvirate immediately became a lightning rod for public anger, denounced in Greece and in three other countries that later went to it for help as an agent of misery. Unemployment soared, reaching 27 percent in Greece and nearly that in Spain. Repeated assurances that recovery was just round the corner collided with reality. The European Union as a whole has now had six quarters in a row of negative growth. Greece has been stuck in a grinding recession for six years.When the troika agreed to throw a lifeline to Cyprus in March it imposed such harsh terms, including the effective confiscation of some bank deposits, that protesters took to the streets waving placards denouncing it as the “Fourth Reich.”Only in Ireland have the troika’s policies, anchored in budget cuts and tax increases, shown much sign of working. In recent weeks, Mr. Rehn has signaled a slow but steady retreat from these austerity measures and acknowledged that unemployment has reached unacceptable levels.“Is the troika learning from its mistakes?” asked Capital Economics, a British research group, in a research note released Friday. It said the I.M.F.’s admission that “mistakes were made” raised hope that the troika “might be becoming more realistic about the demands that they should make of struggling euro zone members.” But it added that the I.M.F. and its two partners differed on how far the softening of austerity should go, with the European Central Bank still championing the cause of “fiscal consolidation.”Disbanding the much reviled troika, or at least overhauling its crisis management strategy, will not be easy. Addressing the European Parliament last month, Jörg Asmussen, Germany’s representative on the board of the European Central Bank, acknowledged that “the setup is a bit strange” and said it “has to be changed.”But he added that as long as Europe’s economic crisis continued and countries remained under programs negotiated by the troika, the current state of affairs must remain in place. “We have no alternative to it right now,” he said.Mr. Rehn, in an interview last month, acknowledged complaints in the European Parliament that the I.M.F., an outsider, did not have to answer to European institutions and that each of the three members of the troika had “its own philosophy and rules and a very strong sense of independence,” and putting them together was always going to be difficult. But, he added, “It has worked in practice even if it might not have been possible to work in theory.”All the same, he said, change is still needed, particularly in relation to decision-making in the 17-nation euro zone. One big problem, he said, is that when finance ministers of countries using the euro meet to discuss a possible bailout, they must agree unanimously before anything can be done. “By definition the rule of unanimity makes decision-making much less effective and efficient than it should be,” he said.The 50-page I.M.F. report released Wednesday did not provide a general survey of what had gone wrong in Europe, but focused on mistakes in Greece’s first bailout in 2010, which totaled about $143 billion. A major error, it said, was not to force investors holding Greek bonds to accept losses from the start — instead of waiting until late 2011 — so as to reduce the pressure on the government to cut spending. One reason this did not happen, according to the I.M.F., was opposition from the European Commission.Though cast in part as a mea culpa by the I.M.F., the document has hit a raw nerve in Brussels, where officials have mostly refrained from criticizing the fund despite quarrels behind closed doors. There have been frequent tensions within the troika, with some European officials aghast at what they regarded as the I.M.F.’s insistence on unrealistic debt targets for Greece. Negotiations over what to do about Cyprus also created friction, particularly over a quickly aborted initial plan that involved seizing a portion of insured bank deposits held by savers with less than 100,000 euros in their accounts.The European Central Bank has mostly stayed out of this week’s public fracas. Mario Draghi, the head of the bank, said in Frankfurt on Thursday that his institution had no plans to issue its own mea culpa. “In fact, one good thing, as far as I understand, about this I.M.F. paper is that the E.C.B. is not being criticized,” said Mr. Draghi.Instead of reviewing past errors, he said, Europe should “take stock of the extraordinary progress made and the positive path that has been taken.”