Zindzi Mandela’s earliest memory is sitting outside a Pretoria, South Africa, police station in 1962 while her mother, Winnie, delivered a favorite dish to her father, Nelson Mandela, being held inside.“I was 18 months old, but I can really remember that moment, sitting in the car, waiting for my mother to return. I must have sensed somehow that there had been some sort of trauma, and I was very scared. It was taking her so long.”Ms. Mandela was recounting this memory while sipping a cranberry soda beneath the imposing columns of the Pierre Hotel’s elegant main bar in Manhattan more than half a century later. “I had no notions back when I was a girl in Soweto or a young woman involved in the struggle that I would one day go from that place to spending my life in rooms like this,” she said.The long arc of a person’s life was on Ms. Mandela’s mind because, the previous evening, yet another film about her revered father, now 95 and bedridden from a lung infection that has him fighting for his life, had its premiere, this one at Alice Tully Hall. And the film — “Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom,” based on Mr. Mandela’s autobiography — tells the complicated and not always uplifting story of his life, from a childhood in a tiny rural village to his slow immersion in the struggle against apartheid, his leadership of the African National Congress, his 27 years in prison and his eventual resurrection and triumph.Some of the most prominent movies about Mr. Mandela, like Clint Eastwood’s “Invictus,” have burrowed in on one episode in his life, much as Steven Spielberg did with the passage of the 13th Amendment in “Lincoln.” But that was not an option this time. “We were adapting his book,” the director, Justin Chadwick, said. “So we had to have the whole journey. We couldn’t cherry-pick.”Those who lived through those years in South Africa, or even through just part of them, must inevitably watch the film while comparing its depiction with their own memories. For Zindzi Mandela, this is a highly personal and emotionally draining challenge that she is still wrestling with.On a much smaller scale, I had been based in South Africa as a foreign correspondent for four years in the early ’90s, arriving three weeks after Mr. Mandela was released from prison and leaving the day after he was inaugurated president, pretty much the entire transition period to multiracial democracy. I saw Mr. Mandela many times over those years, at political events and social occasions, and interviewed him a few times. The genial grandfather with the halting speech pattern and the puckish sense of humor that he presented in public concealed, as we all knew, a spine of steel and an almost supernatural stubbornness that forced the world to come to him.No film can be expected to capture the nuance and multiple dimensions of a man as politically canny and historically towering as Nelson Mandela, of course. To try to distill Lincoln onto the screen, Mr. Spielberg focused on a single episode in his life, allowing the president’s subtle gamesmanship and disarming folksiness the space to reveal itself. The filmmakers here had to capture a man who, unlike Lincoln, is still around and whose family and friends and allies know vividly.The task therefore was to cram a life, especially one as event-filled and consequential as Mr. Mandela’s, into a single film without turning it into a toothless exercise in hagiography. The solution Mr. Chadwick and his screenwriter, William Nicholson, came up with was to use the prism of his family, particularly his marriage to Winnie and his interaction with his children. Though there are still passages spelling out the complex chess game that Mr. Mandela played with P. W. Botha, F. W. de Klerk and other apartheid leaders, the core of the film involves his faltering relationships with his family.That Winnie, Zindzi and other Mandela children acted as official “historical advisers” became more of a benefit than a hindrance, Mr. Chadwick said, because they were just as keen as he was to have Mr. Mandela portrayed in the round, including his faults.“He is a human being,” Zindzi Mandela said. “An extraordinary one, but a human being.”It is not exactly a warts-and-all story. Mr. Mandela emerges — as one might expect from a film based on his own version of events and overseen by members of his family — as a great and inspiring leader who saw more clearly and fought more resolutely than anyone else. But shadows and contradictions are allowed to creep in, from Mr. Mandela’s serial philandering as a young man to his disappearance into the anti-apartheid struggle that left his wife and children foundering in township poverty. Winnie is not spared either, emerging as an angry and estranged wife who embraces violent revenge when her husband speaks of reconciliation and peace.“It allowed us to not be too sanctimonious about Mandela, which is often the case with biopics,” said Idris Elba, the British actor best known in America for his television roles in “The Wire” and “Luther,” who plays Mr. Mandela from young adulthood to his mid-70s.Ms. Mandela has gotten used to seeing actors portray her father on screen — like Sidney Poitier in the TV movie “Mandela and de Klerk” (1997) and Morgan Freeman in “Invictus” (2009) — and has even appeared as a character herself. But never before, she said, has a film tried to capture the arc of her distant and fractured relationship with her father, and the painful breakup of her parents’ marriage.In public, in those days, Mr. Mandela was genial if a bit on the courtly and formal side but always ready to flirt with young women on the elevators at A.N.C. headquarters in downtown Johannesburg. But the sometimes glowering and despairing character who emerges now and then in Mr. Elba’s performance was always kept backstage, though his closest aides would sometimes describe blistering dress-downs.“You should have been in his family to see that side of his personality,” Ms. Mandela said. “Oh, he could be quite angry. And you could always tell when he was angry. Whenever he started pacing his words, you knew that you were in trouble.”The part of the Mandela story that I knew best, the negotiations to persuade white South Africans to share power with the black majority, the bloodshed in the townships and the eventual, almost unbelievable transformation of the apartheid state into a colorblind democracy, is but one section of the film. For me, though, it was my window on the story.So many of the important characters of that period — notably Joe Slovo and the South African Communist Party — are airbrushed out. Besides a “Comrade Mandela” sign at a rally, there is no indication of Mr. Mandela’s stubborn insistence on loyalty toward Mr. Slovo and the Communists, even after international leaders, in the wake of the collapse of the Soviet Union, pressed Mr. Mandela to assuage the fears of global business leaders by renouncing his longtime ally. Missing, too, are Thabo Mbeki and Jacob Zuma, Mr. Mandela’s successors as president and key players in the negotiations.The Zulu-based Inkatha party, with whom A.N.C. supporters battled in the townships during those years, is not mentioned, and it will be difficult for viewers to understand exactly who was fighting, and why, during the “civil war” in the townships in the early ’90s. Instead, the period is used to illustrate Mr. Mandela’s shift from his earlier embrace of violence to his post-prison insistence on reconciliation and peace, and how a split over that tactic was among the forces that broke up his marriage. Winnie’s own controversial activities during those years are touched upon as well, but not some of the grisly charges that were leveled against her.Of the younger leaders who emerged then, and who are now playing prominent roles in South Africa’s government, only one — Patrick Lekota, known as Terror, whose nickname came from his soccer-playing style — appears briefly. He was a leader of the United Democratic Front, among the more radical groups that felt the “old men” running the A.N.C. had lost their stomach for the struggle.Mr. Chadwick, a British director from Manchester who counts the intense and realistic films of Ken Loach as an inspiration, plotted with his screenwriter to carve an emotional path through this thicket of incident and personalities. Mr. Chadwick was also determined, he said, to make the film as “immersive” as possible.“We wanted to feel like we were right in there, amongst it,” he said. “Everything had to be 360.”Recreating the townships of that era proved difficult. Soweto streets that were once gravel now are paved, houses once surrounded by chain-link fences are now bounded by concrete walls, and many have shiny new cars parked outside, unheard of in those days. The filmmakers had trouble laying their hands on the armored military vehicles or the ubiquitous yellow Internal Security vans that once terrorized the townships, as they were either destroyed or in museums. A run-down commercial strip in Kliptown, one of Soweto’s oldest neighborhoods, had to double for Sophiatown, the former black neighborhood in Johannesburg that was bulldozed by apartheid authorities in their zeal to separate the races. While some filming took place on Robben Island, where Mr. Mandela was held, today, the prison is a museum, so the filmmakers had to build a set showing the prison’s central courtyard and a row of cells as they would have appeared in those days.Mr. Elba was understandably nervous about depicting such a familiar figure, especially since he does not particularly resemble Mr. Mandela. He tried to do it by using Mr. Mandela’s distinctive speech patterns and the pained, shuffling walk of his later years.“Normally, I’m highly critical of actors doing voice work,” Mr. Elba said. “Outside of a small handful of people who are especially gifted at it, like Daniel Day-Lewis, I don’t think it works. But we had already blindsided the audience by giving them a Mandela who was not a lookie-like, so I knew I had to do something.”There were a few incidents during the filming that made him confident he was on target, Mr. Elba said.In the first week of shooting, he had to give a historic speech that Mr. Mandela delivered on South African television, exhorting his followers to abandon violent struggle and embrace the peace process. (“We cannot win a war,” Mr. Mandela told them, “but we can win an election.”) An old sound technician came over afterward and told him that, by coincidence, he had miked Mr. Mandela for that speech.“He told me it was uncanny, so I thought, ‘O.K., I’m on the right track,’ ” Mr. Elba said.Zindzi Mandela has seen the film many times, she said, but so far only with a large audience. “I have had to watch the way I react,” she said as she prepared to head out into the Manhattan afternoon. “What I need to do is to see the film alone. Only then, I think, will I be able to allow myself to feel it completely.”She was quite bitter with her father for leaving the family and disappearing into the A.N.C. underground and then prison. And even after he was released, pressing duties kept him away from the family.“I used to joke that, at least when he was in prison, I was guaranteed two visits every month,” she said. She was also angry with him for coming out of prison with a message of reconciliation rather than the military triumph that she and her mother and many other township activists craved.“I just didn’t believe that people could change their minds overnight,” she said.Now, she said, she rarely talks about those difficult years with her own children or the many other Mandela grandchildren, worried that it might somehow betray her father’s policy of reconciliation. Mr. Mandela rests now in a hospital bed in his Johannesburg home, hooked up to a respirator and trying to get well enough to be allowed to travel down to Qunu, the small village in the Eastern Cape where he was raised. That, she said, is where he wants to die.The long arc of Nelson Mandela’s life is drawing to a close, she knows.“Intellectually, I know he is dying,” Ms. Mandela said. “But emotionally, I am not ready.”