CAIRO — Hundreds of police officers shut down the headquarters of the Interior Ministry in at least seven provincial capitals on Tuesday in a series of protests against what they called political exploitation by the government of President Mohamed Morsi.The demonstrations were a rare instance of open dissent by the country’s security forces.Officials of a police union that called for a strike on Tuesday charged that Mr. Morsi and his Islamist allies had used the police as tools to beat back demonstrations by his political opponents. They said the government had wrongly scapegoated the officers for the resulting fatalities.Over the last three weeks, more than 50 people — almost all civilians — have died in clashes with security forces around street protests. Human rights activists have accused the police of excessive force, although the protesting officers sought to shift the blame to the government.“We will not bear the responsibility of the political failure to contain the situation,” Ahmed Al-Helbawi, a leader of the police union, said in an interview. “Police and civilians are falling every day, and it needs to stop.”In comments to reporters, Michael Posner, the American assistant secretary of state for human rights, democracy and labor, also appeared to blame the police for the fatalities.“There are credible reports that police and security forces have used excessive force,” he said, according to news service reports.Egyptian authorities had an obligation to ensure public order and quell violent protests, Mr. Posner said. He did not directly criticize Mr. Morsi for failing to rein in the police, but Mr. Posner did say: “We have heard reports of cases throughout Egypt where the police have resorted to torture and other forms of cruel treatment of those in their custody. There are also reports of deaths in custody.”Meanwhile, protesting riot police officers accused Mr. Morsi’s government of refusing to equip them with the weapons they need to defend themselves, forcing them to rely only on nonlethal weapons like water hoses and tear gas.“We don’t want the weapons to use against protesters or revolutionaries — we want them to fight the armed outlaws who shoot live ammunition at us,” said Mr. Al-Helbawi, the union leader, repeating the government’s refrain that criminals had infiltrated the protests.On the streets, some protesting officers borrowed the slogans of the opposition protesters they often clash with.“The ministry is the same, thugs and thieves,” chanted a crowd of nearly 500 officers outside an Alexandria police headquarters.