This month at a symposium at Georgetown University on Afghan women, Secretary of State John Kerry praised his predecessor, Hillary Rodham Clinton, whom he referred to as “Madam Secretary-Senator-First-Lady-Everything.”He called her one of the country’s “remarkable secretaries of state,” and said that “nobody has done more to advance the cause of women” than she had.Mr. Kerry’s remarks drew applause from the crowd, but they also pointed to a dilemma for Mrs. Clinton in the effort to define her tenure as secretary of state. She did devote much of her time at the State Department to advancing women’s and girls’ issues and believes those efforts have deeper implications in democratization and diplomacy.But some people close to Mrs. Clinton worry that, because of the high profile given to her work for women’s rights, and the headlines now being generated by the hyperkinetic Mr. Kerry, her efforts on trickier diplomatic situations have been eclipsed.What about her 13 trips to Libya in 2011 to build the coalition that led to the ouster of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, they ask. Why is no one talking about how she brokered a cease-fire in Gaza? Anyone remember that she furthered economic sanctions on North Korea?The struggle to define Mrs. Clinton’s accomplishments at the State Department has intensified in recent days as Mr. Kerry and his latest assertive diplomatic effort — a successful push for an agreement with Iran that would temporarily curb the country’s nuclear program — have drawn tough comparisons with Mrs. Clinton.Freed of any presidential ambitions, Mr. Kerry appears willing to wade into political minefields. He has taken whirlwind trips to the Middle East, revived peace talks with Israel and Palestine and struck a deal with Russia to remove chemical weapons from Syria. All the activity seemed to provide fresh evidence for those who viewed Mrs. Clinton’s tenure as overly cautious.In contrast, even when members of Mrs. Clinton’s own party describe her achievements, they tend to point to a lot of miles traveled (956,733 to be exact).Her biggest chance to shape how she is viewed may be through her memoir, which is due out next summer. Dan Schwerin and Ethan Gelber, who both worked under Mrs. Clinton in the State Department, are assisting with the book.Former State Department officials say Mrs. Clinton and her advisers need to do a better job of highlighting how her work on women’s issues ties into national security efforts and the progress now underway.“There’s a direct correlation between countries that pose direct threats to our national security and those where the mistreatment of half the population is a root cause,” said Philippe I. Reines, a longtime adviser who served as deputy assistant secretary of state. Mr. Reines said that while Mrs. Clinton often made this point, her team failed to articulate that connection publicly.He added that “people should not confuse the unique tools and attributes only she could bring to the job as a replacement for being a hard-core diplomat.”While at the State Department, Mrs. Clinton enjoyed generally positive media coverage and some of her highest approval ratings. She was often portrayed as a pantsuit-wearing globe-trotter, hitting the dance floor in Pretoria, South Africa, and partying in Cartagena, Colombia.She took on the job at a time when the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan had given rise to widespread anti-Americanism abroad. In 2006, favorable opinions of the United States had fallen in most of the 15 countries surveyed, including France, Germany, Russia and Japan, according to the Pew Global Attitudes Project.President Obama’s victory in 2008 and Mrs. Clinton’s frequent personal visits helped mend tensions, and by mid-2009 favorable opinions of the United States in Western Europe, Asia and Latin America were almost as high as before President George W. Bush took office.But even before she left the State Department this February, supporters and detractors were already working to define her tenure.Conservatives continue to seize on the State Department’s handling of the attacks on the United States mission in Benghazi, Libya, last year that led to the death of four Americans, including Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens. Citizens United, the conservative political action group, plans to release a documentary in 2016 about Mrs. Clinton’s time at the State Department.Republicans argue, more generally, that scrutiny of her time at the State Department is overdue. To counter those attacks David Brock, a longtime Clinton supporter and founder of Media Matters, a liberal watchdog group, recently published an e-book titled “The Benghazi Hoax.” Mr. Brock used an appearance on MSNBC to question the credibility of Dylan Davies, the now-discredited source of a “60 Minutes” report about the handling of Benghazi that prompted CBS News and the news program to apologize.Mrs. Clinton, for her part, has devoted much of own her time to delivering paid speeches that emphasize her accomplishments at the State Department, drawing laughs when she talks about discussing democracy and “The West Wing” with officials in Myanmar on a trip that was the first time a high-level American diplomat had visited the Southeast Asian country in 50 years.Her memoir is expected to include unreported capers, like how in the summer of 2012 when Mrs. Clinton and her entourage went from Paris to Kabul to Tokyo to Mongolia to Thailand to Israel to Egypt. At one point, Jake Sullivan, Mrs. Clinton’s director of policy planning, dropped off for a couple of days to go on an undisclosed trip to Oman to help lay the groundwork for the current United States-Iran dialogue.The point of the story, one former State Department official emphasized: You inherit your predecessor’s work.“The truth is, the reason Secretary Kerry can do what he has done thus far is that Hillary Clinton and others were behind a sanctions scheme that worked,” said Tad Devine, a Democratic consultant who advised Mr. Kerry in his 2004 presidential campaign.Whether the public will ultimately embrace that view of Mrs. Clinton’s role is unclear. But the fact that her supporters are eager to defend her tenure — and connect her work to Mr. Kerry’s — suggests a level of concern about her legacy should she decide to run for president in 2016. She did not avoid issues for fear they would come back to haunt her in a campaign, they say.One former State Department official said Mrs. Clinton worked aggressively on Middle East peace, but that with the election in June of Hassan Rouhani, a moderate with a more conciliatory worldview, the political climate in Iran had changed in favor of the current deal.Another pointed to her apology to Pakistan last summer after American airstrikes in 2011 killed two dozen Pakistani soldiers. Critics jumped on the move, calling it part of Mr. Obama’s “apology tour” to the Muslim world.This person said of the apology, “That’s not exactly the politically expedient thing to do in the Iowa caucus.”