ATHENS — On a quick visit here amid tight security just a few hours after Greek lawmakers narrowly approved a new barrage of austerity measures, Germany’s finance minister on Thursday backed Greece’s efforts to revive its battered economy, saying the German government could provide financing for Greek businesses but ruling out a restructuring of the country’s huge debt burden.“The discussion about a debt haircut is not a good idea for Greece,” the finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, told a meeting of Greek and German business representatives, stressing that the topic could be addressed once Greece achieved a primary surplus — a measure of the economy without counting debt payments — but that for now there was no alternative to the tough economic reforms agreed upon with the country’s foreign creditors.“You have to stick to what has been agreed,” he said, expressing “admiration” for the government’s efforts. “Ten years ago, we were the sick man of Europe but we followed a tough course to emerge from the crisis,” said Mr. Schäuble, whose visit was widely seen as a bid to highlight the success of a Berlin-backed austerity program in Greece ahead of general elections in Germany in September.Yannis Stournaras, the Greek finance minister, said Athens remained dedicated to the recovery program, but he expressed concern about relentless austerity, noting that “the impact of the flow of capital from the European south to the European north on interest rates could pose a threat to the stability of the euro zone.”On the eve of his trip to Athens, Mr. Schäuble stressed that he was not representing Greece’s so-called troika of international lenders — the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund. “My visit comes at the request of the Greek prime minister to show that we trust Greece, that we want to do everything we can bilaterally to support Greece on its difficult path," Mr. Schäuble told the German TV station ARD on Wednesday. "I’m not the super-troika.”Despite the reassurances, security was tight in Athens, the capital, on Thursday, with 4,000 police officers on duty and a ban on public protests in the city center, amid concerns about public anger flaring up over a continuing austerity drive for which many Greeks blame Germany, the euro zone’s paymaster.There was little evidence of anger on the streets because of the heightened police presence. But most Greek newspaper headlines conveyed a simmering resentment. “Hail Schäuble, those who are about to die salute you!” proclaimed the left-wing publication Avgi. The center-right Kathimerini was one of the few to focus on reports that the minister planned to pledge 100 million euros, or $262 million, to a fund aimed at bolstering Greek businesses.Mr. Schäuble met with Prime Minister Antonis Samaras and other government officials, but in a break with protocol, there was no meeting scheduled with President Karolos Papoulias. The president, whose role is largely ceremonial, early last year had accused Mr. Schäuble of insulting Greece by questioning the country’s commitment to an austerity program imposed by international creditors.In a meeting heavy with symbolism, Mr. Papoulias met instead with Alexis Tsipras, the head of Greece’s main leftist opposition party, Syriza, for talks that centered on Greece’s longstanding demand for reparations from Berlin stemming from Germany’s occupation of Greece during World War II. In a televised exchange, Mr. Tsipras told Mr. Papoulias that Athens “should rise to the occasion and claim an unfulfilled historic debt.” Mr. Papoulias said he had broached the reparations issue with German authorities when he was foreign minister in 1995, without success. “But that doesn’t mean that the issue has been erased,” he said.Mr. Tsipras was accompanied on his visit to the president by the veteran leftist lawmaker Manolis Glezos, who achieved hero status in Greece after tearing down the Nazi flag from the Acropolis in 1941. Mr. Glezos said German occupiers took Greek hostages in the first days of the invasion so the Wehrmacht could hold a parade without protests. “Now Schäuble has come and all Greeks are hostages,” Mr. Glezos said in what appeared to be a reference to the authorities’ security crackdown.The leftist opposition, which is neck-and-neck in opinion polls with Mr. Samaras’s conservative New Democracy party, has decried four years of austerity in Greece as “slavery imposed by the troika.” But despite the vehement objections of the political opposition and labor unions, Mr. Samaras’s fragile coalition government pushed a new package of reforms into law early on Thursday.The bill, which includes a contentious plan for thousands of layoffs and wage cuts for civil servants, squeaked through the 300-seat Parliament with 153 votes, securing the release of the first installment of 6.8 billion euros in rescue loans approved by euro-zone finance ministers last week but raising questions about the ability of the government to enforce the cuts.The aid is being meted out in tranches to keep the pressure on Greece to honor its commitments to the troika, which has extended the country two bailouts worth 240 billion euros since the spring of 2010.