
                    Why suffer through grumbling vacations with others when it’s so much more blissful to go it alone?

        
                    
The first rule of travel is that you should always go with someone you love, which is why I travel alone. The writer’s life is more openly narcissistic than most, yet it takes a true connoisseur of self-involvement, a grand master in the art of selfishness, to experience the world’s delights as they are meant to be enjoyed: through one pair of eyes, via one set of ears, with the perfect use of your own nostrils, tongue and touch. I believe that traveling alone is the last great test of who you are in a world where everyone aches to be the same.        
                    I mean, you meet people. But you also meet yourself. That is the beauty of going it alone. For me, it all started with a trip from Scotland to America when I was 18. I had been there in books and movies, of course, and, in my youth, I had studied my countryman Robert Louis Stevenson’s strictures about New York. “You must speak to no one in the streets,” he was told, “as they would not leave you till you were rooked and beaten. You must enter a hotel with military precautions.” As it turned out, I fell on New York like an old pal. I arrived and immediately went for a drink on 34th Street and thought I was in heaven. The heaven was being oneself. Perhaps even being oneself for the very first time, without tradition scrutinizing you, without expectation hounding you, without class defining you and without a sense of other people lording it over you. That’s an unforgettable experience, especially in youth, because the lasting feature of the solo traveler lies in his hunger for singularity. Even today, when I grab my passport and head for the airport, I have something of Emerson in mind, wandering into the woods to establish “an original relation to the universe.” But I also have Jean-Paul Sartre in mind: “Hell is other people.”        
                    The fun starts with the choices. Will I be solo tobogganing in New Zealand? Will I be watching Wagner’s “Ring” cycle in a series of Bavarian chapels? Attending a vegetarian cooking course in the Taurus Mountains of Turkey? Drinking approximately 400 shots of tequila on some God-forsaken beach in Thailand? Doing yoga in Amorgos, Greece, in front of a perfect blue sea? Or will I be cycling through the back roads of France with the promise of lunch up ahead and no conversation?        
                    Every vacation is an ego trip for somebody. It’s just that in families the person actually commanding the ego trip has to pretend he or she is running a functioning democracy. (And vacations, like failed states, are always run by one person.) People argue so much on vacation because the occasion so often falls short of the desire: the desire is for rest, peace, no pressure, and a sense of being away from one’s usual self, and your average family holiday sets fire in comic sequence to each of these high hopes. And often as memorable and meaningful as a family holiday is, it just doesn’t feel like a holiday.        
                    What feels like a holiday is turning up alone at the Hotel Danieli in Venice on a beautiful day. You open the window onto the Grand Canal and you feel the breeze. You order tea from room service and press your face against a cotton pillow. You take out the books you will read and you run a warm bath. You lift pictures of your loved ones from your suitcase and place them gingerly on the bedside cabinet and blow them a kiss. You switch off your phone. Then you take off your shoes and die of bliss. “From midday to dusk I have been roaming the streets,” wrote Henry James in a letter to his brother William from Rome. “At last — for the first time — I live!”        
                    Let me dispel a few myths. You will be lonely. No: you won’t. My solo travels in Paris have brought many perfect hours of being alone but not a moment of loneliness. People who depend on other people are often in hiding from themselves. Two and a quarter million people live in the City of Light: you will see many of them and you will pass them in the street, but when you see Notre Dame after dark and walk home and perhaps stop to have a drink in the Marais, you can feel that the only thing that is missing from your experience is the common dependency on someone to distract your attention. You are living without it: you are on vacation.        
                    Distraction can be nice. Of course, it can. One of the reasons many people travel is to find a structured way of distracting themselves to the point of oblivion. I’ve been to Ibiza with a crowd of boys and forgotten my own name. I once went on a group holiday to Machu Picchu on which the people — a group of solo travelers looking for adventure — spent the whole time involved in a rolling soap opera that only used the forgotten city as a kind of verdant background. They couldn’t see the sites: they only saw each other and themselves in each other’s eyes. Everyone needs something specific, I guess, and you can’t travel far away from your basic needs. But traveling alone offers the chance to test the limits of what you think you know about yourself. Who knew that he needed a barefoot walk on a long white beach and the sight of a thousand jellyfish thrown up on the sand? Who knew that he needed a bottle shop serving perfect Australian shiraz, a jacaranda tree sprouting blue against a hopeful red sky over Byron Bay — who knew he needed these exact things in order to know he could survive the sickness of a child and the depression of a parent? I know that man, reader, and he went there alone.        