JOHANNESBURG — Former President Nelson Mandela’s health is improving after nearly a week in the hospital being treated for pneumonia, South Africa’s government said on Wednesday.“President Nelson Mandela continues to make steady improvement in hospital,” said a statement released by the office of President Jacob Zuma. “His doctors say he continues to respond satisfactorily to treatment and is much better now than he was when he was admitted to hospital.”“He has been visited by family and continues to make steady progress,” the statement said, without listing which family members had visited with him.The statement did not say when Mr. Mandela, 94, might be discharged. Referring to Mr. Mandela by his widely used clan name, the medical bulletin was headlined “Doctors are happy with Madiba’s progress.”Mr. Mandela spent 27 years in prison in his fight against apartheid, emerging without bitterness to lead the country through a perilous transition from white minority rule to full democracy. He served just one term as president, stepping down in 1999 to devote his retirement to charity.He retired from public life altogether in 2004, and has not been seen at a public event since 2010, when South Africa hosted the World Cup soccer tournament, though visiting dignitaries still pay calls to him, as Hillary Rodham Clinton did last year. A beloved figure at home and abroad, Mr. Mandela’s health has been closely watched and South African news reports said congregants in churches had prayed for him over the Easter period.Mr. Mandela has been hospitalized three times in the past four months, including for 19 days in December, when he was treated for a lung infection and had surgery for gallstones.The latest medical bulletin followed a similarly upbeat assessment over the weekend that said Mr. Mandela was improving, countering overseas news reports that he had suffered a relapse.On Saturday, the government said Mr. Mandela “had developed a pleural effusion,” or a fluid buildup in the lungs, which doctors addressed, enabling him “to breathe without difficulty.”Lung infections have been a persistent problem for Mr. Mandela, who contracted tuberculosis while in prison.