
From the moment of my arrival in South Africa in late 1983 to my enforced departure at the insistence of the apartheid government in early 1987, Nelson Mandela was everywhere and nowhere: a name on protesters’ lips, but unseen and unheard, a potent refrain in the clamor for liberation, a hidden presence in a remote prison cell, the anchor on a dream of freedom.        
In an era long before YouTube and Twitter, his enduring commitment to what people called the struggle — and his refusal to dilute or compromise the principles that earned him a life sentence in prison — was woven by example and word of mouth through the years of protest and emergency rule in the mid-1980s that pressured the white authorities toward capitulation.        
His name suffused and sustained the international anti-apartheid movement — the songs and “Free Mandela” concerts and street protests — that reminded the country’s Afrikaner rulers of the opprobrium in which they were held, not just among campus demonstrators in far-off lands but, increasingly, in the boardrooms of banks and industries with the power to enforce the economic sanctions that eroded their dominion.        
By the time I briefly met him, his role had grown beyond the constituency of black hopes for freedom. He had become the repository and to some extent the guarantor of white hopes that his moral stature would protect them, too, in the uncertain transition to democracy and beyond.        
A later generation of correspondents would recall Mr. Mandela’s years of liberty and the fraught relationship that developed with his wife, Winnie, who became mired in scandal, divorce and criminal charges. But when I arrived in South Africa, she claimed a different status, banished to a remote and dusty township outside the rural, Afrikaner settlement of Brandfort 250 miles south of Johannesburg — a token of a broader, family commitment to opposing white rule.        
The restrictions imposed on her included a prohibition on meeting socially with more than one person at a time, other than her family. As virtually a nonperson, she could not be quoted in the South African press or leave the township without the authorities’ permission to visit with her husband, by then in Pollsmoor Prison outside Cape Town. Her husband had been imprisoned for over two decades, and there was talk that the authorities might make a conditional offer to free him if he renounced violence.        
It was left to his family to carry his response to his followers and to enunciate his beliefs.        
“We have never really dreamed that our salvation lies with someone else,” Winnie Mandela told me in January 1985. “We believe our salvation lies in our hands.”        
A month later, Zinzi Mandela, one of the couple’s daughters, then 23, stood before 9,000 people at Jabulani Stadium in Soweto after a visit with her father. Her words galvanized black resistance to compromise.        
“My father says: ‘I cannot and will not give any undertaking at a time when I, and you the people, are not free,'” she said. “'Your freedom and mine cannot be separated.'”        
When he was, finally, freed in 1990, I listened in on a live broadcast of the event, along with a group of still-exiled South African freedom fighters on a scratchy shortwave radio in my apartment overlooking the Nile in Cairo, where I was based — an incongruous setting at the opposite end of the continent from his liberation in Cape Town.        
It seemed as if his legend had come full circle, with all its complex strands of peace and war, reconciliation and triumph, martyrdom and redemption. But when I did finally meet him during a visit he paid to Cairo in May 1990, those monumental themes seemed distilled into a characteristic graciousness.        
“How are you?” he asked, as if it were far from our first encounter. From my point of view it was not: for me, as for many others, this colossus seemed part of our moral landscape; and now a handshake and a courtesy had turned a myth into a man, magnifying both of them.        
Alan Cowell was Johannesburg bureau chief from 1983 to 1987. 