WASHINGTON — The Obama administration lifted a sweeping ban on visas for officials from Myanmar on Thursday, further easing sanctions against the country despite growing fears that ethnic violence is threatening its nascent steps toward democracy.Lifting the ban, first imposed in 1996, is the latest effort by the administration to reward Myanmar after its president, Thein Sein, began to open its political system and economy in 2011 after decades of military rule.The State Department said in a statement that the move was intended “to strengthen and encourage further reform” in Myanmar, also known as a matter of American policy by its former name, Burma. The United States last year lifted most sanctions that limited trade between the two countries, though military commanders and companies affiliated with the military still face sanctions targeting human-rights abuses, drug trafficking and arms sales. Although the State Department never published the names of those banned, the restrictions on traveling to the United States applied to hundreds of military officers and other officials who were part of the country’s military dictatorship, as well as their families.Mr. Thein Sein, removed from the list of banned officials last year, is scheduled to meet Mr. Obama during his first visit to Washington this month, according to administration and Congressional officials. He has been traveling extensively to encourage investment, but continues to face questions about the depth of changes. A United Nations envoy in Geneva warned in March that while Myanmar had made significant progress, the eruption of mob violence against Muslims and continuing civil wars were undermining its transition to democracy. In central Myanmar, a man was killed Wednesday in a new outbreak of sectarian violence, in which Buddhist mobs destroyed property owned by Muslims, Reuters reported.The euphoria that has greeted the release of political prisoners, most prominently Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who now serves in Parliament, and the lifting of many draconian laws on unions and the media over the last two years has increasingly faded. State Department officials declined to discuss publicly those concerns or the reasons for lifting the travel ban now.The European Union lifted most of its sanctions against Myanmar last month, a move that was criticized as premature by Human Rights Watch. In Washington, human rights advocates and lawmakers have supported the administration’s strategy to ease sanctions step by step, but some worry that Myanmar was no longer doing enough to merit more rewards. “While I’m still waiting to hear details of these and other potential moves,” Representative Joseph Crowley, a Democrat from New York, said in a statement, “I urge the administration to stick to its policy of action for action.”