ATHENS — The photo splashed on the cover of a Greek newspaper this weekend shocked a nation: Pavlos Fyssas, a Greek rapper whose music inveighed against far-right groups, lay dying in a pool of his own blood as his girlfriend cradled him in her arms, moments after he was stabbed in the heart.The suspect has been linked to Greece’s neo-fascist Golden Dawn party. Almost as chilling are accusations by some witnesses that a squad of police officers stood by as a group of burly, black-clad party members chased Mr. Fyssas down. A police spokesman denied that account, saying officers arrived right after the stabbing, in a gritty Athens suburb last Wednesday, and promptly arrested the suspect.The killing of Mr. Fyssas has spurred the government to begin a risky crackdown on Golden Dawn, opening its first investigation into whether the police forces are infiltrated by sympathizers or members of the group, one of the most violent rightist organizations in Europe.On Tuesday, officers raided three police stations on the outskirts of Athens. The sweep came a day after the government replaced seven senior police officials — including the chiefs of special forces, internal security, organized crime and the explosives unit — to ensure the investigation would take place with “absolute objectivity.” In addition, two top members of the Greek police force resigned abruptly Monday, citing “personal reasons.”Such steps have the potential for volatile repercussions in a country where the security forces have had links to far-right organizations at various points since the end of World War II. They are likely to test the determination of the government and the public to turn back the influence of Golden Dawn, which has climbed steadily in opinion polls in the past year and has 18 of its members in Parliament.“This is a pivotal moment,” said Harry Papasotiriou, the director of the Institute of International Relations at Panteion University in Athens. “It is not clear whether Greece will become more or less stable as a result of any crackdown. There is always the risk that there is a more violent response, but this needs to be done.”Until now, the government and most of the Greek public have stood by in a kind of outraged tolerance as Golden Dawn intensified a campaign of intimidation against immigrants, whom the group blames for a rising tide of crime and accuses of taking jobs away from Greeks amid a grinding economic crisis.“But now they have killed a Greek, and they have crossed a red line,” Mr. Papasotiriou said. “That has triggered a new movement against them.”The public outcry after the killing of Mr. Fyssas, who used the stage name Killah P, placed greater pressure on Prime Minister Antonis Samaras, a member of the right-leaning New Democracy party, to investigate a police force he has repeatedly defended, despite a cascade of reports drawing links between the police and Golden Dawn.Human rights groups say the police have for the most part looked the other way as Golden Dawn has systematically terrorized immigrants. These aggressive acts, sometimes captured on video by Golden Dawn members and posted on the Internet, involve roving groups crushing market stands run by immigrants, riding in gangs on motorbikes armed with clubs and shields bearing swastika-like symbols and beating immigrants with wooden poles draped in the Greek flag.Nikos Demertzis, a professor of political sociology at the University of Athens, said allegations of police collusion with the far right were not surprising. “Generally there is a tradition in Greece that the far-right organizations have certain links with the police — this is a historic, recurring theme,” Mr. Demertzis said.Armed with promises to restore jobs and order, members of Golden Dawn hew to nationalistic and xenophobic slogans, appealing to marginalized Greeks in rough areas populated by a rising tide of unemployed immigrants, mostly from Pakistan and North Africa.But Golden Dawn has also increasingly clashed with leftist groups. This month, thousands of Greeks protested in Athens after about 50 Golden Dawn members, wielding bats and crowbars, attacked members of the Communist Party as they hung posters for a youth festival, leaving nine people hospitalized.Mr. Fyssas appears to have been another symbolic target. The lyrics of his rap songs often criticized what he saw as a rising tide of fascism in Greece perpetrated by Golden Dawn.There are conflicting reports about what happened in the moments before his death. The police are investigating witnesses’ accounts that Mr. Fyssas was watching a soccer game in a cafe when one of his friends made a disparaging remark about Golden Dawn that was overheard by another patron.Not long afterward, according to some accounts by witnesses, about 30 Golden Dawn members, including the suspect in the killing, Giorgos Roupakias, 45, converged on the cafe. Mr. Fyssas’ mother, who was not present at the scene of the killing, has asserted that about 12 police officers were present when the stabbing took place.“Golden Dawn is more violent than far-right groups in other countries,” Mr. Papasotiriou of Panteion University said. “They have morphed into an organization that is much nastier and violent and criminal than typical far right elsewhere. Whereas one might disagree with Marine Le Pen,” he said, referring to the leader of the far-right party in France, “these guys here emulate the Nazi model and resort a lot to violence.”Mr. Demertzis of the University of Athens said Golden Dawn was suspected of being organized like a paramilitary organization, headed by a leader who is surrounded by 10 to 20 people close to him. Cells of 30 to 50 people in different areas of the country are organized “in full obedience as soldiers,” Mr. Demertzis said, adding that they take an oath of loyalty to the leader and the organization. “They operate like commandos, or special forces in the sense that they are supposed to leave no traces behind.”Investigators are also looking into reports in the Greek news media that special forces officers in the military have secretly trained with Golden Dawn members.The police strongly deny any ties between their ranks and Golden Dawn. “The aim of the Greek police is for there to be no shadow over the force,” a police spokesman, Christos Parthenis, said Tuesday. “The stance of the Greek police opposite every incident of violence or lawlessness is nonnegotiable: full investigation, zero tolerance and unwavering enforcement of the law.”The leader of a police union admitted to some troubles within the force, but blamed government officials for a failure to address the problems. “During the last three years, there were many cases during which our colleagues displayed tolerance toward outbreaks of violence by members of Golden Dawn,” said Christos Fotopoulos, head of the Federation of Greek Police Officers, during an interview on Greek television. He said that the federation had flagged the episodes to alert police chiefs and the Public Order Ministry, but that there was little reaction from either.