The bread is here.In bustling Brighton Beach, the Brooklyn neighborhood just north of Coney Island, the writer Anya von Bremzen finally found the sour bread of her Moscow childhood.“It has coriander and molasses, and the taste of fermentation,” she said in a bakery there last week, picking up a chocolate-brown loaf with the tangy scent of rye flour. “Bread was everything to us.”Ms. von Bremzen, who was born in Russia near the end of the Khrushchev era, has just published “Mastering the Art of Soviet Cooking,” an ambitious food memoir that is also a meticulously researched history of the Soviet Union, complete with agricultural policies, family narratives, cultural shifts and genocidal horrors. “I’d say I was inspired by ‘War and Peace,’ ” she said matter-of-factly, browsing among the pickled vegetables at a cafe. “What Russian writer tackling a big subject wouldn’t be?”The book is also a meditation on culinary nostalgia, not only for traditional Russian foods like black bread and wild mushrooms, but also for forbidden dishes like plump czarist-era pelmeni in Champagne cream sauce, and even dubiously delicious Soviet standards like squishy “Friendship Cheese.”Some of today’s post-Soviet nostalgia (like a Brooklyn restaurant, Back in the U.S.S.R., that serves a dish called Lunch for Politburo Members under a life-size golden statue of Lenin) seems unpalatable to Ms. von Bremzen, now that she has studied the bizarre and tragic history of food in the Soviet era.“It’s breathtaking that there could be a Stalin brand of vodka in my lifetime,” she said, referring to Stalinskaya, a premium Romanian brand whose slogan is “For the strong ones.” The famines and food shortages that resulted from Stalin’s agricultural policies, which killed millions of Soviet citizens, reverberated through her childhood, and now through her book.Born in Moscow in 1963, Ms. von Bremzen attended a kindergarten for the children of Communist party elites, where she received a state-mandated daily dose of fish oil in a spoonful of Caspian Sea caviar. Her grandfather was a senior Soviet intelligence agent during World War II; her father worked in the Moscow laboratory dedicated to preserving the corpse of Vladimir Lenin, still entombed in Red Square. (He was in charge of making sure the leader’s skin never changed color.)But she lived in the Soviet Union just over a decade; in 1974, in the midst of Leonid Brezhnev’s repressive regime, she emigrated to Philadelphia with her mother, Larisa, who is Jewish. It was around that same time that Brighton Beach became a haven for Russian Jewish émigrés. Even now, English is a second (or third) language on the strip, where Georgian bakeries jostle for space with 99-cent stores and Uighur noodle joints. (Stalin and Mao battled over the Uighurs, Central Asian Muslims whose central city is Kashgar, a crucial midpoint of the spice route that is known for its fragrant, East-West cooking style.)Nostalgia is visible at every turn in Brighton Beach today, where the rise and fall of the Soviet Union is still playing out. Luxurious supermarkets like Brighton Bazaar are staffed by young Uzbeks and Tajik immigrants, who are leaving Central Asian homelands that had greater wealth as members of the U.S.S.R. than they do now. La Brioche, a bakery that has revived the extraordinary pastry traditions of turn-of-the-century Odessa, stands opposite glossy buildings, behind security gates, that are rising along the waterfront, providing pieds-à-terre for wealthy Muscovites.Some places, like Elza Fancy Food, serve improbable (and sometimes great) hybrids like Uzbek-Korean cuisine, but the food often has a strange, sad Soviet back story. Central Asian dishes like rice plov and lagman noodles, many types of chim-cha (the Northern cousin of kimchi), and a kind of peppery potato kugel called hanum are results of Stalin’s first mass deportations — the “cleansings” that still cause mayhem today, in places as far away as Chechnya and as near as Boston.In 1937, virtually all the ethnic Koreans living near Russia’s far eastern border, around Vladivostok, were put on trains, transported 4,000 miles west and ordered to establish farming collectives. “They were supposed to grow rice for the entire Soviet Union on the Central Asian steppe, where there was nothing,” said Ms. von Bremzen. Thousands died, but some farmers thrived, until the newly independent Central Asian republics became too poor to support them in the post-Soviet era.Today their descendants are making their way in a changed world — like Alex Kan, a young co-owner of Elza Fancy Food, who arrived in Brooklyn via Tashkent, and speaks Russian, North Korean and some Uzbek. (He has tried New York Korean food, but finds it too fiery.)Ms. von Bremzen made multiple research trips to Moscow, pulling government records and reading new histories of the Soviet era that would never have seen light under the old order. In one of the book’s devastating segments, she lays out Khrushchev’s plan of replacing wheat with corn as the nation’s staple grain, which ended in crop failures and the first Soviet-era bread lines, “a cartoonish fiasco with millions of tons of topsoil simply blowing away,” she said. Bread, she reminds us, is symbolic and sacred: the one true food of the Russian table.She also tells the remarkable story of the most influential figure in the Soviet cooking landscape: Anastas Mikoyan, a high-ranking Politburo member who became the first “people’s commissar” for food. At Stalin’s urging, he visited America in 1936 to study the food systems of a vast industrial democracy, as the Soviet Union then saw itself.Having met with Henry Ford and tasted popcorn, Mikoyan returned with grand plans for self-serve cafeterias, mechanized cow milking and Eskimo pies. In 1939, his agency published the first and only Soviet cookbook, “The Book of Healthy and Tasty Food,” a kind of state-sponsored “Joy of Cooking.” Through many editions, it remained the only officially approved cookbook until the Soviet Union ended in 1991.“Imagine: one-sixth of the world’s land mass was supposed to have one cookbook,” Ms. von Bremzen said. “It’s no wonder that now we have gone from monochrome to multichrome.”