TACHILEIK, Myanmar —  The verdant fairways of the golf course outside this northeastern city in Myanmar might suggest a measure of normalcy and tranquillity — except for the handguns that some of the golfers wear.In a region known for rival ethnic armies and drug-trafficking gangs, many officials find it prudent to carry sidearms even as they play 18 holes.In the city, which sits along the border with Thailand, a picture of barely controlled lawlessness emerges, with at least eight ethnic militias patrolling the streets in different uniforms. Despite their presence — or, in some cases, facilitated by it, Thai officials say — drug traffickers regularly smuggle shipments of heroin and methamphetamine pills to Thailand.Myanmar has begun a remarkable transformation over the past two years, edging toward democracy and moving past the legacy of five decades of military rule. But borderland areas of the country, long riven by ethnic conflict, pose a stubborn impediment to the government’s hopes for national peace. Officials have repeatedly postponed the announcement of a national cease-fire, partly because of the government’s inability to come to terms with ethnic groups located in an arc around the northern and eastern borders of the country.The United Nations reported on Wednesday that Myanmar’s production of opium, which is used to make heroin, rose 26 percent this year from 2012. Opium cultivation by the region’s impoverished farmers has increased for seven straight years, the United Nations says. Production of methamphetamines in northeastern Myanmar has also surged.“This area is ignored in the global conversation about Myanmar,” said Jason Eligh, the Myanmar country manager of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. “The rising level of opium cultivation is an indicator that things are not going well.”Mr. Eligh, who has traveled widely through the northeast of Myanmar, says it is afflicted by a “classic mix of guns and trafficking.”“There are dozens of groups with dozens of different agendas,” he said. “You are not going to find a resolution to the conflict without first addressing the issue of drugs. We are talking about a process that is going to take years and years.”An on-and-off conflict between the central government and the tangled jumble of ethnic groups in northern and northeastern Myanmar is sometimes described as the world’s longest-running civil war.Since Myanmar, then called Burma, gained independence from Britain in 1948, ethnic groups have been battling for greater autonomy. Today, under the first nominally civilian government since 1962, they are clamoring for federalism. The central government and especially the military have not yet proposed a specific alternative to the country’s highly centralized state, controlled by members of the main ethnic group, the Burman.The volatility of the region is underlined by periodic attacks and skirmishes, including a blast near the border with China on Tuesday that left at least three people dead, according to Burmese news accounts.A sort of de facto autonomy reigns in many parts of the borderlands, including large swaths of territory where the central government has little or no presence.The starkest example involves the Wa people, who had something close to autonomy during British colonial rule and who since 1948 have built a state within a state, including their own armed forces, the United Wa State Army. With at least 20,000 men under arms, it is one of the largest rebel armies in Asia.The Wa have built their own roads, schools, hospitals, courts and prisons. They use their own license plates, have their own police force, and access Chinese and Thai networks for phone and Internet connections. The leadership writes in Chinese characters, and many if not most Wa do not speak Burmese.U Aung Myint, a spokesman for the Wa, said Wednesday that the Wa leadership had not held talks with Burmese government officials since October. “The government in Naypyidaw has not properly answered our call for a Wa autonomous state,” he said, referring to Myanmar’s capital. The Wa have not yet decided whether to agree to the nationwide cease-fire agreement, he said.Here in Tachileik, the Wa have a “liaison office” that functions like an embassy. U Ar Thet, the deputy liaison officer, told a visiting reporter that the 20 or so Wa representatives in the office were armed “for self-defense.”The Wa have rejected the central government’s role in conducting a census next year. Wa leaders say they will count their own people.Government peace negotiators have met with a range of ethnic groups, sometimes on rebel-held territory. Yet the government has deferred the key question, ethnic leaders say, of how a unitary state inured to decades of top-down military rule will devolve power to the ethnic areas in a new and more democratic Myanmar. Leaders of ethnic groups say the military, which has maintained significant influence and power in the new government, does not appear to be budging from the idea of central command.“Everybody, including the president, is talking about federalism — except the military,” said Gun Maw, a general who is the deputy chief of staff of the Kachin Independence Army, an ethnic militia that has clashed regularly with government troops.Speaking on the sidelines of peace negotiations in November, General Gun Maw said the government and ethnic groups were “still in the precondition phase of the peace talks.”Outside observers say they see an overall improvement in the situation in northern Myanmar but are concerned about the continued, periodic clashes between government troops and ethnic forces.A Thai military intelligence officer who is a member of a special task force that deals with border security said he believed that the Burmese military was pursuing a strategy of “clobber, then caress.”“The Burmese government is pretty smart at this,” he said. “They are trying to push and push these groups. And then once tension grows, they propose more talks.”Thailand is particularly concerned about the situation because of the record seizures of methamphetamines in recent years and the prospect of violence spilling across its borders, as has happened in the past.The intelligence officer, who declined to be quoted by name because it would jeopardize his work, said ethnic leaders told him that “deep down inside they still mistrust the government, especially because the government and military seem to be moving in different directions.”Mr. Ar Thet of the Wa liaison office would not comment on the overall prospects for peace. But he said the security situation had definitely improved in Tachileik during his decade and a half working in the city.“When I arrived here there were shootings almost every day,” he said. “Now it’s only once in a while.”An avid golfer, he also plays down the danger of fighting on the fairways.“During my 15 years here, there has only been one attack on the golf course,” he said.