JAKARTA, Indonesia —  The relationship between Indonesia and Australia, Pacific neighbors with a long history of cooperation and trade, has in recent years been marked by disagreements on a range of issues, including human rights, terrorism and asylum seekers. But relations reached a new low over the weekend over the latest bombshell from the surveillance scandal involving a third country, the United States.The Indonesian foreign minister, Marty Natalegawa, announced at a news conference on Monday night that he had recalled Indonesia’s ambassador to Canberra, the Australian capital, for “consultations” over reports that Australia, a close ally of the United States, used its embassies in Asia to collect intelligence as part of global surveillance conducted by the United States’ National Security Agency. The Indonesian government also said it would review its security cooperation and information exchanges with Australia.Arguably Indonesia’s most important bilateral relationship and security partner, Australia is a familiar target of Indonesia’s anger.Yet Mr. Natalegawa curiously ignored the role of the United States, making no mention of the status of Indonesia’s ambassador to Washington. “It has not been a very good day for the Indonesia-Australia relationship,” Mr. Natalegawa said.In Canberra on Tuesday, Prime Minister Tony Abbott defended his government’s intelligence operations abroad, without addressing the accusations regarding Indonesia.“Australia should not be expected to apologize for the steps we take to protect our country now or in the past, any more than other governments should be expected to apologize for the similar steps that they have taken,” he said in a statement before Australia’s Parliament.After the German magazine Der Spiegel published documents last month leaked by Edward J. Snowden, the former N.S.A. contractor, Mr. Natalegawa summoned the ambassadors of Australia and the United States to respond to reports that Australia’s embassy in Jakarta was part of the United States-led spying effort. The documents said Canberra had tried to bug the phone of President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.The two countries are separated by only about 125 miles at their closest point, but differences are stark: Australia is a wealthy, progressive country with a majority of Christians, while Indonesia, the world’s largest Muslim-majority nation, is a developing country with small but vocal radical Islamic groups promoting jihad against the West. Terrorist attacks against Australian tourists on the resort island of Bali, boats laden with asylum seekers trying to reach Australia, and even the treatment of live imported Australian cattle in Indonesian slaughterhouses have all strained ties.“There are no two countries that are less like each other,” said Dewi Fortuna Anwar, a senior adviser to the Indonesian vice president, Boediono, who, like many Indonesians, uses only one name. “We have different histories, different ethnicities and until recently, very different political systems.”Dr. Anwar and other analysts cited a survey showing that most Australians believe that Indonesia still has an authoritarian government, despite its transition to democracy after the ouster of President Suharto in 1998. Analysts say some of the blame for the divide can be traced to sensational reporting in both countries, as well as grandstanding by politicians and activists.Beneath the surface, however, the Indonesia-Australia relationship is far more productive. Leaders from both countries have repeatedly called their relationship the most important for their respective countries. Australia is the largest donor of aid to Indonesia — $508 million in the past fiscal year — and Indonesia is Australia’s 13th-largest trading partner. Australia is also the No. 1 international study destination for Indonesian university students, and many current and former cabinet officials, including Mr. Boediono and Mr. Natalegawa, attended Australian universities. The countries’ heads of government have been holding at least four scheduled meetings per year. Indonesia and Australia also engage in regular joint military exercises.Yet some analysts say the fundamental problem with the bilateral relationship lies at the people-to-people level.Calum Hyslop, an Australian researcher and commentator on Australian-Indonesian relations, said some Australians perceived Indonesia as a raucous, dangerous backwater inhabited by Muslim extremists that should be treated with suspicion, while ordinary Indonesians viewed Australia as a lecturing, arrogant Western nation that had little regard for Indonesian sovereignty.“Until the Indonesian and Australian governments deal with perceptions of Indonesia within the Australian population, there will be very little interest among Australians to even study the Indonesian language,” he said.The recall of the Indonesian ambassador came amid already heightened tensions over asylum seekers, mostly from South Asia and the Middle East, who use Indonesia as a transit point to make the dangerous boat voyage to Australia. This month, Indonesia refused a request by Australia to take about 60 asylum seekers in a crippled boat.Alan Dupont, a professor of international security at the University of New South Wales, said that Indonesia’s intelligence service also used its embassies abroad to spy on its allies, including Australia, and that it was unlikely that either country would stop.“Indonesia has to decide what the endgame is here,” Professor Dupont said. “Some Indonesian elites are upset and out for a bit of blood, and the government has to be seen as doing something.“I think it will obviously blow over at some stage,” he said. “The question is: how much damage is done?”