Searching for KennedyTo the Editor:I enjoyed Jill Abramson’s thoughtful assessment of books about John F. Kennedy (“The Elusive President,” Oct. 27). But she seems to scold historians for not figuring Kennedy out, and her conclusion laments their inability to overcome their subject’s elusiveness. Yet isn’t Kennedy’s elusiveness precisely the point? As Norman Mailer recognized, Kennedy made himself hard to know — perhaps deliberately, perhaps because as a “man who was not quite real to himself,” he lacked self-understanding. If there is not yet a perfect biography of Kennedy, it is less the fault of the many bright women and men who have tried to write one than of their subject, who continues to defy easy description 50 years after his death.ANDREW J. ROTTERHAMILTON, N.Y.The writer is a professor of history and the director of peace and conflict studies at Colgate University.◆To the Editor:Jill Abramson omits several valuable books about Kennedy and his presidency. Two especially glaring omissions are books by Theodore C. Sorensen, Kennedy’s favorite speechwriter and close adviser. Both “Kennedy” and “Counselor” capture the president as a thinking politician, at once serious and wry. Lewis J. Paper’s excellent “The Promise and the Performance” offers a balanced assessment. And Herbert S. Parmet’s fine two-volume life, “Jack: The Struggles of John F. Kennedy” and “JFK: The Presidency of John F. Kennedy,” remains a landmark of Kennedy scholarship, neither fawning nor denigrating.R. B. BERNSTEINNEW YORKThe writer is a distinguished adjunct professor of law at New York Law School.◆To the Editor:In her essay on John F. Kennedy, Jill Abramson states: “The belief that he would have limited the American presence in Vietnam is rooted as much in the romance of ‘what might have been’ as in the documented record.”The record shows that on Oct. 2 and 5, 1963, President Kennedy issued a formal decision to withdraw American forces from Vietnam. I documented this 10 years ago in Boston Review and Salon, and in 2007 in The New York Review of Books.The relevant documents include records of the Secretary of Defense conference in Honolulu in May 1963; tapes and transcripts of the decision meetings in the White House; and a memorandum from Gen. Maxwell Taylor to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Oct. 4, 1963, which states: “All planning will be directed towards preparing RVN forces for the withdrawal of all U.S. special assistance units and personnel by the end of calendar year 1965.”JAMES K. GALBRAITHAUSTIN, TEX.The writer is a professor of government at the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs, University of Texas at Austin.◆Rolling AlongTo the Editor:Allow me to point out a minor anachronism in the illustrations accompanying the reviews of “The War That Ended Peace” and “Catastrophe 1914” (Oct. 27). The otherwise very appropriate pictures depict self-propelled artillery pieces rolling alongside the advancing soldiers, but that World War II innovation was still years in the future.MAURICE FOXSAN ANTONIO◆Reply to PerloffTo the Editor:Marjorie Perloff is cross with me (Letters, Oct. 27) for not exaggerating Karl Kraus’s talents in my review of Jonathan Franzen’s “The Kraus Project” (Oct. 13). That is different from belittling him. Kraus was a witty, brilliant and hard-working writer-journalist, not a clear or consistent thinker. To put him in the same intellectual pot as Wittgenstein or Freud sets a standard he is bound to fail. His aesthetic tastes were not notably “modern,” and his political judgment was essentially literary. He had indeed read widely before starting Die Fackel, but doesn’t seem to have kept up after. Far from dismissing his antiwar play, I suggested only that its apocalyptic ending marked a failure of political imagination. Nor did I “condemn” Kraus for not foreseeing the First World War. I wrote rather that the war and the collapse of liberal democracy surprised Kraus, as they surprised almost everybody. In his first full statement on the war, in November 1914, Kraus himself said that such a calamity could not have been imagined — for if so, it would not have occurred.EDMUND FAWCETTLONDON◆A Turn of the ScrewTo the Editor:Have I slipped into an alternate universe, one where Henry James never existed? The review of “This House Is Haunted” (Oct. 27), concerning a nervous governess hired to care for a little boy and girl in a spooky mansion that may or may not be haunted, doesn’t even mention James’s classic “The Turn of the Screw.” This is like reviewing a book about a 19th-­century hunt for a white whale with no word about “Moby-Dick.”WILLIAM FISHERNEW YORK