LOS ANGELES —  With no end in sight to the federal government shutdown, governors across the nation are struggling with a cascade of tough decisions about when and whether to step in with state money to keep shuttered parks and programs operating until the deadlock is resolved.Here in California, Gov. Jerry Brown, a Democrat, said the state, which is recovering from a steep economic decline, would not intervene to keep its vast network of national parks, like Yosemite, open to the public until the federal shutdown ended.But in South Dakota, Gov. Dennis Daugaard, a Republican, has pleaded, so far unsuccessfully, with the Interior Department for permission to use state money to keep open the Mount Rushmore National Memorial, a symbol of his state and one of its top tourist draws.“Mount Rushmore is just a wonderful tourist destination and clearly the most significant attraction for tourism in South Dakota,” Mr. Daugaard said in an interview.Gov. Jan Brewer of Arizona, a Republican, was also rebuffed after she sought, under pressure at home, to use state money to open Grand Canyon National Park.The decisions so far involve mostly high-profile programs receiving federal support that have been immediately imperiled, among them parks, Head Start programs that provide nutrition and education for low-income 3- and 4-year-olds, law enforcement on Indian reservations and the National Guard.The calculations promise to grow more complicated and more polarizing if the shutdown extends and federal poverty programs administered by the states — in particular heating assistance and child nutrition programs — begin running dry. On Friday, state officials said, governors held a conference call with the White House reiterating that they could not afford to step in for long.In Indiana, Gov. Mike Pence, a Republican, is using state money to keep 244 National Guard members on hand in case of an emergency. Similarly, in Colorado, Gov. John W. Hickenlooper, a Democrat, diverted state funds to keep the National Guard on the job, continuing its cleanup work and road reconstruction after the floods that swept across his state last month.“It’s frustrating to me, and it’s frustrating for the people trying to put their lives back together,” Mr. Hickenlooper said in an interview. “We couldn’t just stop.”And in Massachusetts, Thomas Weber, the state commissioner of early education and care, said the state would keep the Community Action Head Start program, serving 350 children, going for the next couple of weeks by advancing state money from the group’s existing grant. “It really would have been devastating to the program to close,” he said.But Gov. Deval Patrick, a Democrat, reflecting the sentiment of governors across the country, said his state’s capacity to step in was very limited.“If there are any Band-Aids, they’re going to be the small size, and they’re not going to stay on for very long,” Mr. Patrick said. “We’re having to do contingency plans across the board.”A federal government shutdown invariably poses all kinds of political and financial challenges to the states, as was demonstrated during the series of shutdowns in the 1990s.But officials say the situation is markedly worse this time for two reasons. For one, the states are coming off the worst economic downturn since the Depression, which left many of their budgets battered and their rainy-day accounts depleted. And the polarization in Washington has complicated the calculations of state executives more than ever, with Democratic governors having little incentive to take steps to blunt the effect of what polls suggest is an unpopular move by Congressional Republicans.The result has been a bewildering crosscurrent of forces as governors respond to events in Washington in different ways, weighing political, provincial and ideological considerations.“It’s a case-by-case basis,” Mr. Daugaard said. “In many cases where federal funding has lapsed, we simply need to do without. But in some cases, it makes economic sense for the state to step in.”He said he was also looking to use state money to pay for police patrols of Indian reservations and, if necessary, to provide heating care assistance normally financed by Washington.In moving forward to pay for the programs, states are acting without any reassurance that they will be reimbursed, and several officials said they thought that was in fact unlikely, given the political climate in Washington.“We hope so, but we don’t know,” Mr. Hickenlooper said. “This is all virgin territory.”The shutdown of the national park system has proved to be particularly disruptive so far — creating waves of anxiety in regions where the parks are central to states’ economies and identities. In Arizona, business leaders have raised $150,000 to try to keep open at least one viewing site over the Grand Canyon.But the Department of Interior has rebuffed such offers. Mike Litterst, a spokesman for the National Park Service, said the entire system was closed and could not be reopened until financing was restored.“Beyond the legal constraints involved, it would not be appropriate or feasible to open some parks or some parts of parks while other parts of the national park system remain closed to the public,” Mr. Litterst said.Republicans said they viewed that as an attempt by the Democratic White House to keep pressure up on Republicans in Congress.“It’s really unfortunate that the federal government shutdown is affecting the ability of citizens to see this icon of democracy,” Governor Daugaard said. “The state is willing to help.”Ms. Brewer, a Republican elected with Tea Party support, initially said she would not — or could not — do anything to keep open Grand Canyon National Park, taking a decidedly different tack from former Gov. Fife Symington, a Republican, who in 1995 sought to use the National Guard to keep it open, before resorting to collecting private donations.“I don’t know if the Grand Canyon is a priority for the state of Arizona,” she told KNAU, the Arizona Public Radio station, earlier this week. “We have a lot of priorities out here, like our National Guardsmen and our children and people who will be hurting desperately if we don’t get something done.”But since then her spokesman, Andrew Wilder, said the governor had talked to federal officials about using state money and had been rebuffed.The Head Start program is looming as a particular source of pressure for governors and their states. There are thousands of Head Start grants, typically starting at the beginning of the month, meaning that on Nov. 1, more programs around the country are going to run out of money.Yasmina S. Vinci, executive director of the National Head Start Association, said 19,000 children from low-income families had lost or were at risk of losing services in 11 states because of the shutdown.In the weeks ahead, states will have to decide whether they want to step in for programs like Women, Infants and Children, known as WIC, which provides nutrition services for children. Officials said the federal money in the pipeline for that program would last about two weeks; the State of Washington posted a notice on Tuesday saying it had enough money for just nine more days of assistance.“We have enough resources to get to the middle of October, and after that, it’s anybody’s guess what happens,” T. Eloise Foster, secretary of budget and management for the State of Maryland, said of the nutrition program.