MEXICO CITY —  A federal judge has dismissed a lawsuit against the United States by an American contractor serving a 15-year sentence in Cuba for distributing communications equipment there under a State Department program, ending an effort to press the Obama administration into a financial payout and a more vigorous push for his release.The contractor, Alan Gross, has been detained in Cuba since 2009, and his family asserts that his health is deteriorating, which Cuba denies. Over the past year, Mr. Gross’s lawyers have sought to publicize his plight, hoping to break a stalemate between Cuba and the United States, in which officials from each country blame their counterparts for his continued imprisonment.With the dismissal of his case, Mr. Gross may lose some leverage to keep up the pressure. “All I can say is that we are disappointed with the court’s ruling,” said Scott Gilbert, one of Mr. Gross’s lawyers, adding, “We plan to file promptly a notice of appeal.”Experts said the dismissal had been widely expected because of a rule barring lawsuits against the American government based on consequences suffered in foreign countries.The suit was filed in November in Washington by Mr. Gross and his wife, who were seeking up to $60 million from the United States and DAI, the contractor that hired Mr. Gross to go to Cuba under the State Department program, delivering satellite Internet equipment to Jewish groups. It accused his employers of sending him on five semicovert trips to Cuba without proper training, protection or even a clear sense of the Cuban laws that led to his detainment.The case led to the disclosure of some potentially embarrassing details for DAI and the State Department, highlighting the frequent haste and lack of attention to the risks of the State Department programs in Cuba. American officials call them democracy-building efforts, but the Cubans consider them illegal attempts to undermine their government, underscoring the dangers involved. Mr. Gross settled with DAI for an undisclosed sum this month.Philip Peters, founder of the Cuba Research Center, a new nonpartisan group dedicated to analysis of Cuba, says that Mr. Gross must now rely once again on the same American and Cuban governments that have failed to reach an agreement for years.“The bigger battle is trying to get him free,” Mr. Peters said. “And I don’t think it’s easy to read how that’s going.”