BRUSSELS —  Secretary of State John Kerry and allied diplomats stepped up the pressure Tuesday on the Afghan government to sign an accord soon that would allow American troops to stay in the country after 2014.In a comment that reflected the Obama administration’s frustration with the Afghan president, Hamid Karzai, Mr. Kerry suggested that if he was reluctant to be associated with the accord another senior Afghan official might sign it.“His minister of defense can sign it,” Mr. Kerry told reporters. “The government can sign it. Somebody can accept responsibility for this.”The need for an agreement that would provide a legal foundation for American forces to stay in Afghanistan after their formal combat mission ends in 2014 was a major issue as foreign ministers from NATO nations gathered here for two days of meetings.American officials believed they were closing in on an accord last month until Mr. Karzai raised fresh demands and suggested that he would not sign the agreement until after elections for a new president in April.Many of the United States’ allies are also pressing for an earlier signing, arguing that they need the time to secure political support and the financial resources from their parliaments for keeping troops in Afghanistan to train and advise Afghan forces.The accord that is being negotiated between Afghanistan and the United States, known as the bilateral security agreement, is also a template for a similar status-of-forces agreement that would be signed by NATO nations with Afghanistan.“I look forward to its timely signature,” Anders Fogh Rasmussen, NATO’s secretary general, said Tuesday. “If there is no signature on the legal agreement, there can be no deployment and the planned assistance will be put at risk,” alluding to military as well as economic assistance.A particular concern is that the legal understandings be in place by February when NATO defense ministers are to discuss the details of the post-2014 mission in Afghanistan, a senior State Department official said.With Mr. Karzai presenting additional demands, including the release of prisoners being held by the United States at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, the Obama administration is calculating that a unified NATO response may concentrate minds in Kabul.Two senior Afghan officials — the acting Afghan foreign minister, Zarar Ahmad, and the Afghan interior minister, Mohammad Umer Daudzai — are scheduled to join a NATO meeting here on Wednesday morning. Mr. Daudzai, who previously served as Mr. Karzai’s chief of staff and then as Afghanistan’s ambassador in Pakistan and Iran, is close to the Afghan president.The Obama administration has urged that Mr. Karzai sign the bilateral security accord before the end of the year, and not wait until after the election.John R. Allen, the former senior American commander in Afghanistan and a retired Marine Corps general, has written that it is a mistake for the White House to insist that the issue be decided before the end of the year and has urged a more flexible policy.Instead, he asserted that the White House should continue to prepare for a post-2014 mission of carrying out counterterrorism missions and training and supporting Afghan forces and wait to see to if the next Afghan president will endorse the accord.“It would be a mistake to let one man, increasingly detached from Afghan public and political opinion, determine the fate of the American role in South Asia,” General Allen said in an Op-Ed article in The New York Times last week that he wrote with Michael E. O’Hanlon of the Brookings Institution.“The United States should stay patient,” he wrote. “It can say to Mr. Karzai, if you want to reinforce Afghan democracy by letting your successor sign this security deal, we can live with that.”But Mr. Kerry made it clear that the Obama administration has a much tighter timetable in mind and believes that the United States and its allies need all the time they can get to prepare the handover to Afghan forces.“This is not fooling around,” Mr. Kerry said at a news conference at NATO headquarters.“How do you give confidence to the people of Afghanistan?” he said. “How do you give confidence to all those people running for office next year who are looking for some certainty as to what the basis and foundation of that election might be about?“Can you muddle through? Can you do other things? That is not the issue,” Mr. Kerry said. “The issue is how do you get the best transition possible.”