It was supposed to be a moment of quiet dignity as President Vaclav Klaus of the Czech Republic steps down next week after two five-year terms as head of state. Instead, his presidency threatens to end in ignominy as his opponents try to press charges of high treason against him over his granting of amnesty to dozens of people accused of corruption.Few analysts believe that the attempt to charge Mr. Klaus, which is expected to be debated on Monday in the Senate, has much chance of succeeding. And even if it does, his last day in office is March 7, so losing his job — the most onerous punishment he would face — is unlikely to have much bite.But Karel Janecek, the 38-year-old entrepreneur and anticorruption campaigner pressing to charge Mr. Klaus, said the seeming absurdity of going to such extraordinary lengths just days before he leaves office was beside the point. He said Mr. Klaus’s decision to grant an amnesty that resulted in the freeing of about 6,000 inmates and the halt in prosecutions of prominent businessmen and officials charged with financial fraud and corruption had incensed him and millions of fellow Czechs in a country where corruption is a scourge.After Mr. Klaus announced the amnesty in January, irate Czechs ripped his portrait off the walls of offices and schools across the country.“The reason to do this was to fight against evil, and to show those who have lost faith in democracy in this country that even the president is not above the law,” Mr. Janecek said by phone. “People who stole billions from the state have been freed from responsibility. The amnesty was a crime.”The Senate said Wednesday that 28 lawmakers — one more than needed — had requested the high treason debate. In order to garner support, Mr. Janecek said, he spent $100,000 of his own money to pay for online videos and newspaper advertisements urging Czechs to sign a petition calling Mr. Klaus to account. He said he collected 74,000 signatures over the past month for the petition, which was published on a Web site called “high treason” in Czech.Mr. Klaus, an economist known for his fiery iconoclasm, has previously said he did not regret the amnesty. On a visit to Slovakia on Wednesday, he dismissed the move by rival lawmakers as “political games.”Prime Minister Petr Necas, chairman of the Civic Democratic Party, which Mr. Klaus founded, said he felt ashamed by the attempt to tarnish the president.Mr. Janecek said the Senate had the power to file a treason complaint at the Constitutional Court, which then has the power to charge Mr. Klaus. He said the complaint must first be approved by a majority of lawmakers present in the 81-seat house, which is controlled by the left-wing opposition.But Tomas Sedlacek, once an adviser to former President Vaclav Havel and an outspoken critic of Mr. Klaus, said that even if the complaint was filed — and it was unclear senators would be willing to take such a drastic action — it would largely be a symbolic gesture.There was also unlikely to be much enthusiasm to charge the president with treason. “He may have abused his constitutional rights or behaved like a god, but high treason is very severe,” he said, before adding, “But you never know; this is the Czech Republic.”The Czech government has been buffeted in recent months by a series of corruption scandals that have threatened to bring it down. Corruption is so endemic that one industrious Czech started a corruption safari bus tour. Stops include a nonexistent house that 589 companies have registered as their headquarters.