In his 2012 review of the Steven Soderbergh film “Haywire” in The New York Times, A. O. Scott identified and named a new phenomenon in popular culture: strained pulp. “Nowadays,” he wrote, “everyone must love (or at least pretend to love) pleasures that were supposedly once disdained or taken for granted: dive bars, street food, trashy films. But knowing, sophisticated attempts to replicate those things often traffic in their own kind of snobbery, confusing condescension with authenticity. Movies like ‘The American,’ ‘Drive’ and now ‘Haywire’ offer strained pulp, neither as dumb as we want them to be nor as smart as they think they are and not, in the end, all that much fun.”It’s certainly true that much of what was once regarded (and dismissed) as disposable lowbrow culture now enjoys an unprecedented artistic and critical prestige. Are we truly seeing the ascent of a new classification of culture? If so, what are we gaining — or losing — in the process? To find out, Riff assembled the following panel: A. O. Scott; Stephanie Zacharek, the chief film critic for The Village Voice; and Adam Sternbergh, the magazine’s culture editor:Adam Sternbergh: This observation about “strained pulp” really struck me — in part because so much of what I love falls precisely in this category: knowing, sophisticated attempts to replicate pleasures that were once widely disdained. I like Soderbergh’s genre films like “Haywire” and “The Limey”; I like Michael Chabon’s self-consciously pulpy novel, “The Yiddish Policemen’s Union”; heck, I liked “Drive.” Am I dumber than you want me to be? Or not as smart as I think I am? Or both?A. O. Scott: When I wrote that review, I was not really making an argument or staking out a position — I was trying to scratch an itch, to put my finger on something that was bugging me, even about things I kind of liked. The movies I mentioned — “Haywire,” “Drive,” “The American” — struck me as art-house renderings of grindhouse pleasures, self-aware tributes to movies whose apparent lack of self-awareness has always been part of their allure. Let me be clear that I’m not talking about what we used to call, back in the ’90s, “irony,” though a better term might have been “insincerity.” There was a time when just about anything — dumb commercial entertainment, ugly clothes, the weird dishes your grandmother used to serve — could be appreciated and appropriated in quotation marks. Strained pulp is not quite that — its celebration of the formerly marginal and disreputable is serious and sincere. The condescension is not overt but is latent in the desire to correct and improve the recipes retrieved from the past, to finish vernacular artifacts with a highbrow glaze. We’re going to make ’em — movies, cocktails, regional dishes, zombie novels, garage-rock anthems — just the way they used to, but a little bit better. This strikes me as a form of snobbery. But then again, maybe I’m the snob.Stephanie Zacharek: Beware the seemingly random but astute observation, because there’s always some editor ready to turn it into a symposium. I love “Haywire,” “Drive” and “The American,” each of which made one or another of my 10 Best lists, partly because I respond to, and respect, their impetus to capture the disreputable thrills of lower-tier ’70s movies like “Vanishing Point” and “Dirty Mary Crazy Larry.” But I concede that they’re filled with — I won’t call it nostalgia, but I will call it yearning. Is it possible that one person’s yearning for a lost mode of moviemaking is simply another person’s self-aware grab for a mood, a style, a vibe that can’t be recaptured?Scott: I think you’re right that what drives the production of strained pulp is yearning — a desire to recapture and update some of the cool, louche styles that seemed to arrive so effortlessly in the past. I suppose I share some of this yearning, which may be why I resist some of its results. The effort is visible and its source intelligible, which dissolves some of the mystery and the magic. I guess what I’m saying, to stick for another moment with the movies that started this train of thought, is that they are art films in spite of themselves. I’m not trying to knock them, but to note that they perpetuate the very taste hierarchies that they try so hard to undermine.Zacharek: I’d rather have young filmmakers riffing on old cheapies, with wit and vitality, than making, say, quirky little dramedies about dysfunctional families. One of my favorites of 2012 was David Palmer and Dax Shepard’s “Hit and Run,” a road-trip movie that owes something to screwball comedy, but also to pictures like “Dirty Mary Crazy Larry” and “Two-Lane Blacktop.” Shepard co-stars in the film (with his real-life partner, Kristen Bell), playing a character named Charlie Bronson. (Is that obvious or audacious? Or just audaciously obvious?) In the context of everything else around it — our millionth superhero movie; more “Expendables” — “Hit and Run” felt fresh to me. But no one went to see it. It may as well have been an art film or even, as you put it, an “art film in spite of itself.” Maybe what we used to call genre films can now thrive only in the art house. The exception would be straight-up horror movies, which are thriving both creatively and commercially.Sternbergh: But let’s consider what exactly these young filmmakers yearn for. Is it really to improve upon the lowbrow pop culture they loved as youngsters? Or is it to simply recapture a kind of purity of enjoyment those films and books and comics, etc., offered them way back when — and infuse their own work with some of that same pleasure?Scott: Part of the history of strained pulp is the long march to respectability of cultural pursuits that were once deemed trivial or disreputable. In the ’50s, comic books were, according to the anticomic crusader Dr. Fredric Wertham, a public-health menace. Now they are studied in college classrooms. Back when I was a kid, television was a toxic and tantalizing waste of time. “It rots your brain!” my parents said. Now I tell my own kids: “Pay attention. This is important. It’s an allegory.”Movies were at the vanguard, and film critics of the ’50s and ’60s — followed by academic film-studies pioneers — argued fiercely and successfully that they should be taken seriously. And it has been a great victory — for taste, democracy and common sense — that the makers of popular art are recognized as artists and that the work of comic-book illustrators, pulp novelists and B-movie directors is part of the pantheon. But these advances come at a price. For me, comic books are not as much fun when they turn into $200 million movies, because some of the pulpy, transgressive thrill is gone. Same thing when Donald Westlake novels are adapted by graduate students.Maybe there’s no going back. Recently, in the Dining section of our paper, I saw an article about the new interest in frozen cocktails among ambitious young mixologists. “Even if it’s a lowbrow concept,” one said, “you’ll still find highbrow execution.” That right there is literal strained pulp, friends, the kind you find at the bottom of your (very expensive) glass.Zacharek: Ugh. That cocktail quote is dispiriting. It makes me need one.Yeah, comic-book movies have become a problem. The occasional comic-book movie used to be really fun, but now we — not just critics but any moviegoer who’s seriously trying to keep up — are supposed to approach them with the reverence we used to reserve for Bergman and Antonioni. Comic-book fans can be tyrannical snobs, much more so than old-school classical-literature professors. And you’re sneered at if you should happen to mix up Bronze Age and Silver Age Green Lantern.On the other hand, I cringe when I see old-timers pooh-poohing the stuff “the kids” are interested in these days. A few years ago I was on a panel with a very serious, very respected older French film critic. The subject was the spaghetti-western director (and Quentin Tarantino favorite) Sergio Corbucci, a filmmaker this critic didn’t seem to like very much. He mostly expressed dismay that young film people were taking Corbucci’s movies seriously, instead of studying Fellini. And I’m thinking: But you guys have already done Fellini to death! Who doesn’t want to find someone new and exciting — in Corbucci’s case, a director who did his best work almost 50 years ago — to write about? Still, I’m not sure film critics and scholars will be writing serious studies of “Haywire” or “Drive” in 30 or 40 years. If movies are too reflective of the culture of the past, then what, in 30 years, will be considered the movies of our time?Scott: That’s an excellent question: Which of today’s movies will be around to inspire future filmmakers to acts of love, theft and homage? Perhaps not the work of Nicolas Winding Refn, whose latest, “Only God Forgives,” is strained pulp of an especially bloody and tasteless variety. And I should note that the self-conscious pastiche of older styles and genre moves is not always the enemy of originality. Sometimes — the names Godard, De Palma and Tarantino spring to mind — such imitation is the condition of originality. Your question is a reminder that motion pictures are a young art form still very much in the process of self-invention and that recycling might preserve the possibility of novelty. So maybe I’ll appreciate “Piranha 3-D” or “Smurfs 2” when the art-house versions come around 30 years from now.Zacharek: Even though it’s no “Big Bird Cage,” I’m really enjoying “Orange Is the New Black.” The show isn’t exploitation or pulp per se, but maybe we could consider it a new wing built onto the genre. It definitely owes a debt to the “women in prison” pulp tradition, and I think owing a debt is perfectly O.K. Sometimes I’ll hear people complaining about a movie cliché when what they’re really talking about is just a convention. Shooting a character running down a circular staircase, for example: that’s used over and over again for some good cinematic reasons — for one thing, the spiral fits nicely within the frame, so a filmmaker can capture this gorgeous, prolonged circular movement, as opposed to just shooting someone stomping down a plain old staircase. Conventions aren’t clichés, they’re building blocks, and I don’t think we’ve come close to exhausting the ways they can be used, freshened, revivified. When Humphrey Bogart played Philip Marlowe in 1946, could we have envisioned Elliott Gould as the same character nearly 30 years later? Maybe 40 years from now, someone will cast Elle Fanning as the aging crook looking for one last big score. She’s no Robert Mitchum — but that’s the idea.Scott: Why not Elle Fanning as Phyllis Marlowe? Genres flourish not by slavish, antiquarian devotion or careful cloning, but by irreverent reinvention. The old archetypal characters acquire fresh faces, and the tried-and-true situations take on new colorings borrowed from reality. I hesitate to invoke “The Wire” in this discussion, partly because it has been so thoroughly assimilated into the television-is-high-art (or great literature) argument, but at heart it belonged to the great pulp tradition of meaty cop shows and nasty romans policiers. Because David Simon, Edward Burns and the other “Wire” writers — among them the great detective novelist George Pelecanos — knew this tradition inside out, they were able to infuse it with everything else they knew about the actual city of Baltimore and its folkways and institutions.So that’s it: My complaint is now a manifesto. No more strained pulp! What we need instead is infused pulp. In a dirty glass. This round’s on me.