After a four-day petitioning blitz, Eliot Spitzer turned in 27,000 signatures Thursday night to claim a spot on the Democratic primary ballot for New York City comptroller.Mr. Spitzer collected nearly as many signatures as Anthony D. Weiner has for his mayoral candidacy, 30,000, but Mr. Weiner had weeks, not days, to conduct his petitioning operation.Outside the Board of Elections office Thursday night, Mr. Spitzer said anyone who would legally challenge his petitions would “be sending a statement they don’t really believe in democracy,” and he sought to cast himself as something of an underdog."We don't believe that bosses dictate who gets on the ballot," he said.The language appeared to be a thinly veiled attack on his opponent, Scott M. Stringer, the Manhattan borough president, who is supported by labor unions and the Democratic establishment.A spokeswoman for Mr. Stringer responded that Mr. Spitzer’s decision to finance his own campaign was itself undemocratic, saying he wanted to “use his personal fortune to try and buy this election wholesale.”The sizable number of signatures collected by Mr. Spitzer is a raw demonstration of what an independently wealthy candidate can achieve in a short time — Mr. Spitzer was said to have paid hundreds of dollars a day to his petitioners — although his opponents may choose to challenge the validity of those signatures.Mr. Spitzer, who resigned as governor after patronizing prostitutes, was the most closely watched among the many candidates who filed petitions with the city’s elections board this week to qualify for the Sept. 10 primary election.To make the ballot, major-party candidates for mayor, comptroller and public advocate were required to collect 3,750 signatures from city voters enrolled in their parties. Candidates were allowed to begin circulating petitions in early June, but Mr. Spitzer did not announce his candidacy until Sunday evening.Mr. Stringer’s campaign said it had collected more than 100,000 signatures — and noted they had been gathered by volunteers.Among the Democratic candidates for mayor, William C. Thompson Jr. said he submitted more than 75,000 signatures; John C. Liu claimed 65,000; Bill de Blasio, 60,000; and Christine C. Quinn, 46,000.On the Republican side, John A. Catsimatidis said his campaign had submitted more than 25,000 signatures.A spokeswoman for Mr. Catsimatidis’s main opponent, Joseph J. Lhota, said his campaign had filed more than 17,000 signatures.Preliminary objections to the petitions filed on Thursday may be lodged until midnight on Monday. Specific, line-by-line complaints are due a week later.Staff members at the Board of Elections will review the objections, and then it will hold hearings, which are scheduled to begin on July 30. Even after fielding queries from a mob of reporters on Thursday night, Mr. Spitzer, heading off into the humid Manhattan evening, did not seem at all tired of the attention.After climbing into the back seat of a black sedan, Mr. Spitzer kept his window rolled down as photographers snapped photos.The car started to pull away. Mr Spitzer, smiling, leaned out to address a reporter: “One last question?” he asked expectantly.The car drove off.