BANGKOK —  Antigovernment protesters broke into and briefly occupied the grounds of Thailand’s army headquarters on Friday, capping a week of dramatic and provocative gestures against the country’s most influential political family.The protests against the dominance of Thaksin Shinawatra, the billionaire tycoon in exile, and his sister, Yingluck Shinawatra, the country’s prime minister, have included seizing the Finance Ministry, cutting power to the police headquarters and occupying a large government facility.The protests are the largest in the country since a military crackdown left more than 90 people dead three years ago. This time the government and the military have been strikingly restrained in their reaction. The government says this is a deliberate strategy of nonconfrontation to avoid violence.“We have not arrested a single protester so far,” Maj. Gen. Piya Uthayo, a police spokesman, said by telephone. Arresting protesters is “not our policy,” he said.Despite provocations by protesters, clashes between demonstrators and the police have been minimal. Protesters deflated the tires of police vans and were said to have used slingshots against a police officer, whose bloodied face was shown in the Thai news media.But another police spokesman, Maj. Anucha Ramayanand, said in a news media briefing on Friday that the police had received intelligence reports of possible disorder in the coming days that could lead to violence. The police have been ordered to “protect buildings and guard against possible calamity.”The military went out of its way on Friday to back away from confrontation.Television footage showed protesters breaking down the gates to the army compound and charging in. But once they were inside, soldiers offered them water and medics performed free health checks.“I don’t want to describe it as an invasion, because they just wanted to submit a letter,” a spokesman for the military, Col. Winthai Suvaree, said by telephone. “Like other government offices, it’s our policy that we try to facilitate the protesters.”Thailand has been shaken by more than seven years of on-and-off demonstrations and unrest that many Thais lament as self-destructive for a country blessed with natural resources. The protests have been a highly personalized battle between Mr. Thaksin and his allies — who have won every national election since 2001 — and a vocal minority in Bangkok and southern Thailand that says his power threatens the country’s democratic institutions.The current protests, which were spurred by the government’s aborted attempt to help bring Mr. Thaksin back to Thailand via a wide-ranging amnesty law, have been led by a former deputy prime minister, Suthep Thaugsuban, who is described by some of his supporters as a Gandhi figure for his self-described campaign of civil disobedience.His opponents, and there are many in Thailand, scoff at this description.Mr. Suthep says the goal of the protests is to rid the country of Mr. Thaksin’s influence. Speaking late on Friday to a crowd of protesters occupying the grounds of a large government complex, he declared the building closed. “There’s no need to come to work anymore,” he said.He said protesters would occupy major ministries by Sunday and called on all other government agencies to strike as of Monday except for the courts, the military and those involved in transport.He also said protesters would occupy the city’s zoo.Mr. Suthep’s utopian alternative to the country’s constitutional democracy — he has proposed a people’s council chosen from among many professions in the country — has been roundly criticized.The country’s education minister, Chaturon Chaisang, described Mr. Suthep’s proposal as “more emotional than rational.”The number of protesters had tapered off since early in the week but remained in the thousands. On Friday, two members of Parliament from the opposition Democrat Party, Abhisit Vejjajiva and Korn Chatikavanij, joined the protests, leading a cortege of well-dressed office workers through the central business district. The protesters delivered a letter to the United States Embassy in response to a statement by the State Department that had expressed concern about the protests.Mr. Korn, a former investment banker with JPMorgan, said Ms. Yingluck’s government was illegitimate because the governing party did not accept a ruling by the constitutional court last week. The court said that the governing party’s attempt to make the upper house of Parliament a fully elected body — half of its members are currently appointed by senior judges and civil servants — was unconstitutional. The governing party rejected the ruling because, it said, the court did not have jurisdiction in the matter.“When the government acts above the law, the people no longer need to respect the government,” Mr. Korn told the crowd as he marched to the embassy.