Yangon’s skyline, punctuated by golden pagodas and the steel skeletons of new development, is a scene of picturesque disrepair and halting progress as Myanmar emerges from decades of military rule that seemed to freeze the country in time. Colonial facades crumble next to new buildings painstakingly constructed mostly by men, not machines. Recently imported cars idle on congested, often flooded, streets. And the Internet — largely unrestricted since 2011 — remains hobbled by frequent and unpredictable outages.Since the country began moving toward democracy two years ago, Myanmar’s leaders have freed hundreds of political prisoners, eased censorship, passed landmark telecommunications and investment laws, and taken steps to stabilize the currency, the kyat. In Yangon, architecture and development firms began to reshape the city’s low-rise skyline, while former political prisoners ran for office and once-censored poets emerged to innovate an already rich literary tradition.For years, the vague language of poetry was one of the only ways for writers in Myanmar to criticize the country’s military rulers. But now that censorship has ended, poets are writing more freely.But the challenges are daunting. For more than two decades the military rulers quelled dissent by disrupting education, minimizing the country’s human capital potential. Parts of the country are wracked by violence between state security forces and ethnic minority groups, while the government’s attempts to improve its public image are frustrated by Human Rights Watch’s assertion  that it is “engaged in a campaign of ethnic cleansing.”Escalating sectarian violence between the country’s Buddhist majority and its Muslim minority stands to threaten the country’s stability. And women continue to face major obstacles to political representation, including a 2008 constitution guaranteeing that the (male dominated) Defense Forces will remain the primary political force in the country.Enrollment is rising at the Aung Thawada Nunnery School on the northern border of Yangon. The nuns, whose ages range from 9 to 94, join for a variety of reasons, including to escape poverty or abuse.The city’s squat skyline mirrors the country’s transition: It swells with new opportunity, but remains arrested by poor infrastructure, sectarian tensions, outmoded gender roles and the debilitating effects of a long-broken education system. Myanmar’s political transition may signal progress, but whether it brings the societal transformation that many hope for remains to be seen. These videos were produced in collaboration with The Center for Digital TV and the World, a project of The Tides Center and UC Berkeley’s Graduate School of Journalism.