VIENNA — Most people don’t look to roulette as a source of steady employment. But in the late 1980s, that’s just what Gonzalo García Pelayo did. All it took was a few weeks of research to figure out the patterns of wheels at different casinos. He won millions of pesetas; a book he wrote on the subject became the basis for a movie, “Los Pelayos,” in 2012.But correctly betting on black (or red, or 23) wasn’t what brought Mr. García Pelayo to the Vienna International Film Festival this year. (Nor was it Casino Vienna — he’d already won his share there.) He was here at the 51st Viennale, which ended this month, as the subject of a retrospective of his six feature films.Before turning to gambling, Mr. García Pelayo was a prolific director during the key period of Spain’s transition to democracy, and onward into the 1980s. From 1976 to 1982, he made five films and garnered varying attention from critics and other artists, including a young Pedro Almodóvar. But then his film career withered. Now, the festival’s organizers are hoping to renew interest in a body of work that is unknown internationally (and less known in Spain than Mr. García Pelayo’s gambling exploits).“He is a wrongly forgotten and practically unknown filmmaker,” Hans Hurch, the director of the Viennale, wrote in an email. “His small, yet extraordinarily rich, extremely personal and cinematographically surprising body of work articulates the moment of the so-called ‘Transición’ as independently and originally like no one else before or after him.”Álvaro Arroba, the Spanish critic responsible for the retrospective, said that “García Pelayo transported the form of a new cinema to Spain, to the land, like what Glauber Rocha did with Cinema Novo in Brazil. In Spanish cinema there is no modernism [besides Mr. García Pelayo] with the exception of Victor Erice and Pere Portabella.” Mr. Arroba recalled Mr. Hurch’s admiring word for these disarming art films: “primitive,” in a good way.“I didn’t abandon the cinema. I felt the cinema abandoned me,” Mr. García Pelayo said in an interview at a festival office on Vienna’s Stadtpark, where he was joined by his wife and his brother and business partner, Javier García Pelayo. “If you abandon a woman, it’s very different than if the woman abandoned you,” he clarified.The attention at the festival, where the films were shown this month, surprised him. “No one was interested in asking anything about the films in more than 30 years,” said Mr. García Pelayo, who at first thought Mr. Alvarez’s inquiries were a joke.Born in 1947 in Madrid, Mr. García Pelayo was the son of a conservative military man and had a large family: 16 brothers. He did a stint in bullfighter management in the 1980s and a run in television production that resulted in Spain’s first sitcom (set in a family hostel). Mr. García Pelayo’s filmmaking was in fact a departure from his ongoing career as a successful music producer, credited for innovating flamenco rock and working with bands such as Triana and Smash.“It all began with his being an owner of a discotheque. It was a little one, but it was a meeting point for an explosion of ideas. A think tank!” Javier García Pelayo said.That night club, Don Gonzalo, opened in 1967 when Spain was still under the rule of General Franco. Mr. García Pelayo hooked up bands and, for the latest music, traded records with soldiers at a NATO base: flamenco for psychedelica. But film exerted a special hold on him — as a student, he traveled to Paris and made the rounds in its many cinemas.He made his debut as a director in 1975 with “Manuela,” a moody adaptation of a tragic novel about a fierce woman who, in an early scene, dances flamenco on a grave. In the movie, Mr. García Pelayo stops the action short at times to run the soundtrack over sparse Andalucian landscapes.“We made ‘Manuela’ just one month before Franco died in November ’75. We had no problems, just a little censorship — the only censorship I had in my life. But it’s not very bad because they cut things I prefer not to see now,” Mr. García Pelayo said.The director felt freer as he went along, in terms of both form and content. In his nudity-filled 1978 film “Frente al mar” couples swap partners under the hands-on direction of a therapist, but everyone is as expressionless as a Bresson character. (“When I direct an actor, the only thing I need is the text. His personality is clearer when he acts bad,” Mr. García Pelayo said in the question-and-answer session following one Viennale screening.)“Vivir en Sevilla,” also from 1978, was made on the cheap. It explodes the notion of a love story with its formal contortions, yet also has a flamenco performance featuring the great Farruco.“‘Vivir’ was the missing piece of the puzzle in cinema history, for me,” Mr. Arroba said, calling it Mr. García Pelayo’s “great masterpiece.”Mr. Arroba put “Vivir en Sevilla” on his list of the 10 best films of all time in Sight & Sound magazine’s poll. Though preceded by a couple of screenings at BAFICI and a series at a festival in Sevilla, the Viennale retrospective is the first in memory. Even Mr. García Pelayo was “super-surprised” to hear from Mr. Arroba .At the time Mr. García Pelayo was still busy with his day job: placing bets on football, tennis, and horse-racing. He estimates that he places 300 to 500 bets daily, in an operation that enlists the help of his family. He develops special algorithms for the trading software MarketFeeder Pro.“We’re absolutely workers. Not like James Bond, and not Dostoevsky. He was a very bad gambler,” Mr. García Pelayo said.Recently he took a break, however, to return to feature filmmaking for the first time in three decades. Completed over the course of the previous year expressly for the Viennale retrospective, “Alegrías de Cádiz” had its world premiere last Sunday. Mr. García Pelayo’s films will travel to Paris in February for a retrospective at the Musée du Jeu de Paume.More may be on the way. (“Like Hong Sang-soo!” Mr. García Pelayo quickly supplied, referring to the prolific South Korean director.) But he’ll always have the numbers game, and then there’s his unquenchable yen for travel (110 countries visited so far), and five children. There’s poker, too.But for the rest of us, this mastery in the arts and sciences of chance sets a daunting example. Should we maybe dabble a little?“Lotteries are probabilistic disasters,” Mr. García Pelayo said, shaking his head. “No comparison.”