THERE’S something that New York State wants to clarify for those facing the “diploma or G.E.D.” box on job applications: General Educational Development is a brand name (like Kleenex and Xerox). That’s important because come Jan. 2 adults in New York and Indiana cannot take the G.E.D. They’ll sit for the Test Assessing Secondary Completion (TASC), from CTB/McGraw, while adults in nine states can take HiSET, the new E.T.S. High School Equivalency Test. After the G.E.D.’s 72-year reign, the splintering comes as a result of an ambitious agenda: the G.E.D. being unveiled in January will align with Common Core State Standards and be offered only on computer (in sync with federal digital literacy standards for adults). Rankled that the adult demographic had not yet been exposed to these new standards — and that their costs will double, to $120 a test taker — states asked other test makers to develop something. As for the new G.E.D., it is being positioned as more than just a high school endpoint. It will now indicate test takers’ levels of performance, with an honors category for those deemed at college or career readiness. Are you ready? Here are sample questions from the new tests, all of which assess math, science, social studies and language arts abilities.G.E.D.: SCIENCE/MATH1. The map (Figure 1) shows Earth’s continents, the outlines of the plates that make up Earth’s outer shell, and locations of volcanoes. Which conclusion can be reached from the information on the map?a. Volcanoes are scattered randomly across Earth.b. Volcanoes are only located along edges of continents.c. Volcanoes are mostly located along boundaries between plates.d. Volcanoes are distributed equally in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres.2. An office building has a decorative fountain shaped like a regular hexagon (Figure 2). To the nearest square foot, what is the area of the fountain below?a. 21            b. 85               c. 127                d. 254 3. Hartley opened a food truck business to sell food on the street. On Day 2, the business earned $112. On Day 5, the business earned $367. Hartley assumes that the earnings will continue to increase at the same rate. How much will the business earn on Day 10? 4. Probability of rain on each of the next three days is:Tuesday: 30%Wednesday: 45%Thursday: 50%Based on the above, what is the percent probability that it will rain all three days? TASC: SOCIAL STUDIES1. Which principle of the United States government is described by this excerpt?When the legislative and executive powers are united in the same person, or in the same body of magistrates, there can be no liberty. There is no liberty, if the power of judging be not separated from the legislative and executive powers. — Baron de Montesquieua. individual rightsb. popular sovereigntyc. separation of powersd. separation of church and state 2. Baron de Montesquieu was an Enlightenment philosopher. Enlightenment philosophy in the 18th century challenged traditional authority and called for a society based on liberty, equality, and human reason. Which statement describes an effect of the Enlightenment in Europe?a. It led to increased restrictions on individual rights.b. It led many countries to introduce democracy to their colonies.c. It led to increased peacetime cooperation between governments.d. It led many citizens to demand more rights from their government. HiSET: LANGUAGE ARTSFor each italicized part of the text below (1 to 6), alternatives are offered at bottom. Choose the alternative that• makes the statement grammatically correct• expresses the idea in the clearest or most appropriate way• is worded most consistently with the style and purpose of the writing• organizes the ideas in the most effective way.Buying a car takes research as well as money. Having your license and saving enough money for an older car and insurance are just the beginning. Finding the right car will require some time and effort. Where do you start? What should you look for?Surprisingly, (1) your local library might be good. There you can access online consumer guides that rate such things as performance, comfort, and mechanical reliability. (2) Don’t forget how helpful reference librarians can be.When you have located a car that you think will meet your needs, try to find out the repair history on the vehicle. (3) Was the oil changed as scheduled to prevent wear on the engine? Has the car had any ongoing or repeated problems? Don’t forget to take mileage into consideration, as well as the number of owners the car has (4) had and also seeing if you can get information about any damage the car may have sustained as a result of accidents. It’s a good idea to take the car to an independent auto mechanic for an inspection. It’s worth the cost to identify potential (5) problems. Before you make a major investment.Finally, check the vehicle’s appearance. If the body has numerous dents and scratches and the inside is ruined, chances are the engine hasn’t been well maintained. (6) If there are major rust spots, you can expect the body to deteriorate rapidly. While these suggestions won’t guarantee a foolproof purchase, they can help you make an informed decision. Researching a car before making an investment is always time well spent. Remember, once you buy a used car, it’s yours.1. a. (No change)b. a good place is your local libraryc. a good place to start shopping for a car is your local libraryd. for starting car shopping, your local library is a good place 2. Which of the following would be the best choice for this sentence?a. (No change)b. Move the sentence so that it comes before the preceding sentence.c. Move the sentence to become the first sentence of the next paragraph.d. Omit the sentence. 3. a. (No change)b. To prevent wear on the engine, the oil was changed as scheduled?c. Oil changed as scheduled to prevent wear on the engine?d. Was the oil changed to prevent wear on the engine as scheduled? 4. a. (No change)b. had, also obtainingc. had getting alsod. had. Try to obtain 5. a. (No change)b. problems beforec. problems; befored. problems: before 6. Which of these sentences, if any, should begin a new paragraph?a. (There should be no new paragraph.)b. If there are major rust spots, you can expect the body to deteriorate rapidly.c. While these suggestions won’t guarantee a foolproof purchase, they can help you make an informed decision.d. Researching a car before making an investment is always time well spent. CLICK HERE FOR ANSWERS 