
KABUL, Afghanistan — Walk through the streets of Kabul and evidence of the West’s decade-long war literally clings to the Afghan youth: the American labels emblazoned on their shirts and jeans, the stylish sunglasses they wear, the cellphones they clutch to update their lives on Twitter and Facebook.        
To those who like to think that the foreign presence here has left more than spent shells and hollowed-out buildings, what the young people of Kabul wear and value can itself offer a sense of comfort. These trappings of the West, the hope goes, belong to a generation ready to embrace women’s rights, democracy and other ideals that America and its allies have spent billions of dollars trying to instill.        
But interviews with dozens of Afghan youth paint a picture of a new generation bound to their society’s conservative ways, especially when it comes to women’s rights, one of the West’s single most important efforts here. Attempts to alter women’s roles in society remain controversial among the younger generation, perhaps the starkest example of the West’s limited influence as coalition forces prepare to withdraw next year.        
“If someone thinks that youngsters have changed, they should think twice,” said Amina Mustaqim Jawid, the director of the Afghan Women’s Coalition Against Corruption. “These young men grew up in a war environment. They don’t know about their own rights; how can we expect them to know about their sisters’ rights, their mothers’ rights or their wives’ rights? If they wear jeans and have Western haircuts, that doesn’t mean they are progressive.”        
Even in Kabul, one of the most liberal cities in Afghanistan, many young men and women express beliefs that fly in the face of the messages coming from American Embassy outreach efforts. Censorship, particularly when it comes to religious offenses, summons little ire. Many consider democracy a tool of the West. And the vast majority of Afghans still rely on tribal justice, viewing the courts as little more than venues of extortion.        
On a recent afternoon, young women gathered on the third floor of a wedding hall, enduring the stifling heat in black niqabs to protest a recently proposed law aimed at protecting the rights of Afghan women. The men remained outside, forming a barricade along the busy street to prevent strangers from entering the hall.        
One poster read, “I am a Self-Aware Woman, I Will Not Be Deceived by the Empty Slogans of the West.”        
“This law is not only against Islamic values; it is also against all other ethical values,” one protester, Saida Hafiz, said to a crowd of about 200 young women and children assembled in the room. “If we remain silent today, soon our society will be morally corrupted like that of the West.”        
Such impressions can be heard throughout the city: in the shared street taxis that cart Kabulis across town, in the bustling cafes of the city’s sparkling Shar-e Naw neighborhood, even on the campuses of the nation’s most prestigious universities.        
Group taxi rides, which serve as Kabul’s de facto bus system, offer an unfiltered view of the local perspective. On board, men of all ages speak openly about everything from politics to traffic — often in the presence of women.        
On a recent evening, a crowd idled downtown along Enhesarat Street, waiting for cars and minivans amid a cacophony of horns and engines. A few men piled into a dusty minivan headed for Taimani 2, an area in West Kabul. As the minivan lurched along the pockmarked roads, they chatted about a recent shoe-throwing fight between two female parliamentarians.        
“Who let these women into Parliament?” said an old man with red hair and blue eyes, his knees pressed against his chest. “Women were meant to stay at home.”        
A young man seated beside him, holding books on his lap and dressed in a blue T-shirt and gray pants, nodded in agreement.        