ALBANY — Among the thicket of proposals being floated to combat Albany’s chronic corruption problem, there is one that seems fairly straightforward: to repeal the Wilson-Pakula Act of 1947, which gives the leaders of political parties the power to anoint nonparty members who want to run on their ballot lines.It is a practice that dovetails with New York State’s unique and antique “fusion voting” system, a vestige of 19th-century elections which has been banned by many other states, which allows candidates to run — and collect votes — on multiple party lines. Over the years, it has been used by some of the state’s smallest political parties to endorse major-party candidates in exchange for consideration of their political goals. Or, as critics allege, sometimes just for money.But several small parties argue that the proposed changes could marginalize their groups — and their political views, a position held by Mike Long, the chairman of the state’s Conservative Party.“Wilson-Pakula didn’t commit the crime, and the fusion system didn’t promote the crime,” Mr. Long said. “You can put us out of business and do away with fusion voting and you’re still going to have to deal with individuals who want to game the system.”The reason for some legislators’ sudden distaste for Wilson-Pakula is simple: the law was at the center of recent allegations against Senator Malcolm A. Smith, a Queens Democrat accused of trying to bribe his way onto the Republican ballot for the New York City mayor’s race. Since then, the law has been criticized by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who said on Tuesday that it encourages “corruption and the appearance of corruption,” tempting some to sell their nominations to the highest bidder.“You’re forcing people to go to the party bosses,” Mr. Cuomo said.Instead of needing the permission of those leaders, Mr. Cuomo said his plan would require candidates to gather signatures to make their way onto their ballot.But critics of Mr. Cuomo’s plan say it could open any party’s nominating process up to deep-pocketed interlopers who could pay petitioners to gather signatures and basically buy their way onto ballots, without holding true to the party principles.“Parties are supposed to select own standard-bearers from people who share their values,” said Daniel Cantor, the executive director of the liberal Working Families Party. “Under this system, primary voters would have no idea if people listed on the ballot had any allegiance to party’s values.”Such an unapproved candidacy could “threaten the integrity of any party,” he said. And if a party has a bad year, there are consequences: they need to draw 50,000 votes in an election for governor to have an automatic line on the ballot for the next four years.Fusion voting, also called cross-endorsements, was common during the 19th century, when parties would often team up to defeat formidable candidates.“Historically it was useful,” said Jim Twombly, an associate professor of political science at Elmira College. “But the reality is that fusion voting as its used in New York is for the trading of political favors.”Dozens of states forbid the practice; this year, Connecticut has considered a bill that would have ended cross-endorsements there.Lawrence Norden, a deputy director of the democracy program at the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University, said he believed that cross-endorsements were still valuable as a way for third-party voters to feel as though their vote counts, as well as a way for candidates to show their support for certain specific issues.“It’s a signifier to the voter as to where that candidate stands,” he said, adding that “it gives voters more choice and more ability to clarify what the candidate’s message is.”In Albany, the powerful Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, opposes changing fusion voting.“I don’t think we should preclude people from running on more than one line,” Mr. Silver said on Tuesday, adding, “There has to be a mechanism for us, for people to gain dual endorsements or more.”The debate is also complicated by the fact that many major-party candidates have openly accepted third-party endorsements, including Mr. Cuomo — who ran on the Working Families line in 2010 — and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, who appeared on the Republican and Independence Party lines in all three of his campaigns and gave money to the Independence Party.Jacqueline Salit, a strategist for the Independence Party, said that she was proud of the party’s “fusion relationships” with Mr. Bloomberg, saying that it had offered independent-minded voters a chance to “say something about their political vision,” including their affection for “nonpartisan governance.”She also dismissed the argument made by some that such cross-endorsements — and the votes they bring — give small-party leaders an outsize influence. “I think it’s a tool for bringing new ideas and new approaches into the mainstream,” Ms. Salit said, adding that “the argument that it’s undemocratic that the small parties can leverage beyond their size in this context, I think that’s laughable.”