HEIDELBERG, Germany —  For Germans and Americans who had long imagined a dramatic coda to the cold war, it came instead in a few solemn, quiet moments. After both national anthems were played, seven American and five German soldiers lowered their national colors, marched at the edge of a bedraggled parade ground and carefully folded the flags for the last time.The ceremony on Friday afternoon, before about 300 onlookers, marked the closing of Campbell Barracks, which, as the headquarters of the United States Army in Europe, issued the orders for the millions of American soldiers — 15 million in Germany alone — who have served on the Continent since 1945. It was a day that most present, mostly an older crowd, had never imagined could come.“We had no idea that Heidelberg will ever close,” said Regina Hingtgen, 62, who has worked with the Army for 41 years, and first honed her English when her parents billeted G.I.’s. The Army was the best employer, she said, affording her, among much else, a flexibility as a divorced single mother that “no German company would ever have done.”The day was bittersweet, said the current commander, Lt. Gen. Donald M. Campbell Jr. — no relation to the World War II staff sergeant after whom the barracks was named —after the low-key ceremony. After the end of the cold war with the collapse of the Soviet Union, then the absorption of new NATO members and alliance commands at the base, followed by almost 10 years of preparation and a dwindling military presence, power was passing forever from Heidelberg.The Army has shifted to a new European headquarters in Wiesbaden, where it sits atop a hill, isolated and thus secure, in this post-9/11 world, from the kind of local interactions that long made the Americans welcome here. As General Campbell noted, it is more effective to concentrate Army might in five key locations in Germany as well as in Vicenza, Italy, and in a cluster supporting NATO in Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Belgium, where NATO is headquartered.The poignant end was a long time coming. The Berlin Wall fell almost 24 years ago, and American troops in Germany have spent more than a decade serving in Afghanistan and Iraq, or offering crucial support to those missions and others in the Horn of Africa, and much else besides.Starting in the 1950s, NATO central army operations were run from the Campbell Barracks, a hulking structure built by the Nazis in 1937, taken over by the Americans in 1945 and renamed in 1948. As NATO expanded to include formerly Communist nations that were once intractable foes, new buildings went up around the base to accommodate new partners. At least 20 flagpoles, now bare, used to fly the colors of nations engaged here.But NATO left in March for a command base in Izmir, Turkey. The city of Heidelberg bid farewell in a Volksfest that drew tens of thousands of people on May 12. In the ensuing months, remaining military personnel and their families also left.Veterans wandered the near-deserted base on Friday stunned by unruly foliage sprouting through the parade ground. “Everything used to be just so pristine,” mused Joe Garvey, who as deputy, chief of public affairs for the United States Army in Europe, recently moved to Wiesbaden after 30 years in Heidelberg. “The hedges were cut exact.”Inside the unassuming building that housed the offices of General Campbell and other top commanders, Col. Bill Williams pondered the decisions made here on the wars in Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq. “If walls could talk,” he said.The Any Mission diner is closed for good, its 1950s-style lamps and ceiling fans still intact. In the cavernous gym, bigger than three basketball courts, scores of neatly stacked weights and fitness machines bear labels like “Kaiserslautern,” indicating that they will now serve soldiers at bases that remain open.Interviews with Germans and Americans who are still here or once served in Heidelberg suggested that the conflict that began on Sept. 11, 2001, spelled the end for American military life in this city of Mark Twain, known for its revered university, a stunning castle dominating the Neckar Valley and the legend of the stuffy “Student Prince” sent here to study but beguiled instead by a beer hall barmaid.After the Sept. 11 attacks, the American troops here hunkered down. Fences were erected around military housing, where American children once played with German neighbors. German friends who used to come freely onto base had to be signed in and escorted, Mrs. Hingtgen recalled. “It kind of closed us off.”Micha Hörnle, 42, a reporter for a local newspaper, The Rhein-Neckar-Zeitung, said the security measures had created a “gated community” and local resentment in a city long grateful that it had been spared American bombing in World War II.Closing Heidelberg will save the Pentagon $112 million a year, mostly in costly security expenses for several scattered facilities, Mr. Garvey said. Still, Lt. Gen. Mark P. Hertling, commander here until his retirement in November, agreed with Mr. Hörnle.“I think a lot went lost,” General Hertling said in a telephone interview. “We Americans went into a cocoon” that was “not all that effective, truthfully,” he added, recalling German friends of troops at the Grafenwoehr base in Bavaria who wept when invited back to the base for a beer festival in 2004.General Hertling recalled his trepidation during his first visit to Campbell Barracks, in 1975 at the age of 21, when he was a second lieutenant. Heidelberg “was the center of everything, almost like the Forbidden City to go to, because that’s where all the generals were,” he said.When he became a commander himself, he said, he argued strongly to keep American troops in Europe — “an ocean” closer than America is to conflict in the Middle East or Africa, and working alongside allies old and new whom they knew personally. As he described the value of direct contacts with 51 European and Asian allies to skeptical members of Congress, “you could almost see the light bulbs go on,” he said.Reflecting on the changes since the end of the cold war, General Campbell cited his own sense of wonder when, just three weeks ago, he stood in Red Square in Moscow with a Russian counterpart after completing joint exercises. More are scheduled in Russia next year.Still, it was the glory days of the Marshall Plan or the tensions over the Berlin Wall, which brought the United States Army’s forces in Europe to their maximum strength of 277,342 in June 1962, that were front and center for Friday’s crowd.Mayor Eckart Würzner, who delivered a speech in English and regaled an interviewer with tales of his study in and annual visits to the United States, recalled that George C. Marshall once said, “We have to teach the Germans the ABC of democracy.”“The strong, successful Germany of today owes its role to the U.S.,” Mr. Würzner told the crowd.He said later that he hoped to develop a youth center for democracy on the property. Will a center suffice to preserve one of the closest of trans-Atlantic relationships among young people who know nothing of World War II? “You have to be very proactive,” Mr. Würzner said. “It won’t just run on its own.”