TBILISI, Georgia —  In the first major conviction to result from a string of prosecutions of former high-level officials in the Georgian government, a judge on Monday found a former head of the country’s prison system guilty of abuse of power in connection with the deaths of seven inmates in a prison riot.The official, Bachana Akhalaia, 33, widely known as Bacho, had gone on to more major posts, serving as defense minister and interior minister. He had become one of the most feared and reviled figures in the government by the time he resigned as interior minister last year after the disclosure of videos showing prison inmates being brutally beaten and sodomized by guards. The judge, Lasha Chkhikvadze of Tbilisi City Court, sentenced him to three years and nine months in jail.Mr. Akhalaia’s lawyer said he would appeal the verdict.The ruling came a day after elections to replace the departing president, Mikheil Saakashvili, in which a major point of contention has been the criminal prosecutions of more than 10 former ministers and dozens of lower level officials from Mr. Saakashvili’s party undertaken by the government of Bidzina Ivanishvili, a billionaire who became prime minister a year ago.The president-elect is Giorgi Margvelashvili, the candidate of Mr. Ivanishvili’s Georgian Dream party and a former education minister, deputy prime minister and university rector. With all but a tiny fraction of votes counted, he received 62.1 percent, compared with 21.7 percent for David Bakradze, the candidate from Mr. Saakashvili’s party, United National Movement. Nino Burdzhanadze, a former speaker of Parliament, finished third with 10.2 percent.Ms. Burdzhanadze has called for the investigation and potential prosecution of Mr. Saakashvili after he leaves office for abuse of power, and Mr. Ivanishvili has signaled his support for that idea.The abuse videos that led to Mr. Akhalaia’s resignation were a major factor in parliamentary elections a year ago in which Georgian Dream won control of Parliament and forced Mr. Saakashvili to serve his final year as president as an opposition figure.Mr. Saakashvili’s supporters say the prosecutions of so many officials in his party represent political retribution, and they have expressed worry that the election will only encourage further criminal cases. Officials in Mr. Ivanishvili’s government say that the cases are an effort to hold former officials accountable for corruption and other abuses of authority, and that verdicts will be reached by independent courts.Constitutional changes set to take effect when Mr. Saakashvili leaves office next month will make the prime minister’s position the most important in government, with full authority over foreign and domestic policy. Mr. Ivanishvili has announced that he plans to step down as prime minister in favor of an unnamed successor.Although he had promised to reveal his choice early this week, Mr. Ivanishvili said Monday that the country would have to wait because Parliament was away and lawmakers must elect the new prime minister.“I made a mistake to say I would announce the candidate Monday or Tuesday,” he said at a news conference with the president-elect. Clearly content with his party’s showing, he bantered with reporters, saying he wished the margin of victory had been even bigger and defending his decision to step down and influence government from afar.Mr. Ivanishvili is Georgia’s richest man, with a fortune created in Russian metal and banking industries and estimated at more than $5 billion — about one-third of the country’s total annual economic output. “I will be slightly more influential than most citizens,” he said at one point during the news conference. “But, so what?” At another point, he said, “If I stay in government, I don’t think it will be very favorable for the country.”The case that resulted in Monday’s guilty verdict is just one of several against Mr. Akhalaia, and his sentence would have been longer — five years — if not for partial amnesty granted by a law adopted last year. In August, he was acquitted in a case involving allegations of physical and verbal abuse of soldiers; two more cases are still in the courts.In contrast to the tension that surrounded voting last year, when there were fears of violence or even civil war, the elections on Sunday were remarkably calm, and voter turnout was relatively low — 46.6 percent compared with 61 percent last year.International observers delivered mostly glowing reports on the election, saying it was generally free of violations and represented an impressive step forward for Georgia, which in its post-Soviet history has seen substantial chaos in the transition of power, including the 2003 Rose Revolution that ushered in Mr. Saakashvili.“In a positive and transparent election, the Georgian people have confirmed last year’s historic transfer of power,” João Soares, who led a delegation of short-term observers from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, said at a news conference. “Georgia’s democracy is maturing.”