TUNIS —  The government on Friday blamed an Islamist extremist cell linked to Al Qaeda for the killing of a leader of the political opposition and identified the chief suspect as the person who also killed an opposition figure in February, saying he used the same automatic pistol in both assassinations.Interior Minister Lotfi Ben Jeddou made the assertions as outrage simmered over the killing of the opposition leader, Mohamed Brahmi, a liberal politician, outside his home on Thursday, witnessed by his wife and children. The public prosecutor’s office said an autopsy showed that Mr. Brahmi, 58, had been hit with 14 bullets from a 9-millimeter weapon, six in his upper body and the others in his left leg.Already criticized for failing to find those responsible for the February killing of another opposition figure, Chokri Belaid, the government was under pressure to produce some answers.Mr. Ben Jeddou told reporters at a news conference that the gunman in both assassinations was Boubakr Hakim, a Salafist and a weapons smuggler who was born in France.“The same 9-millimeter automatic weapon that killed Belaid also killed Brahmi,” Mr. Ben Jeddou said. In each attack, the gunman also rode a motorcycle, he said.Tunisian officials said four of Mr. Hakim’s associates, members of what they called a 14-person jihadist cell linked to Al Qaeda, had already been detained. But Mr. Hakim, 29, was on the run, the officials said. In the days before Thursday’s assassination they raided his aunt’s home, finding a cache of weapons and ammunition, but Mr. Hakim escaped.The government gave few details about Mr. Hakim except that he was born in Paris in August 1983, and worked abroad. His most recent residence has been Douar Hichar, a working-class neighborhood of Tunis where Islamists have a strong following.He is also wanted for gun smuggling and was part of a ring that had been spiriting weapons into the Tunis suburbs from Libya, the authorities said.Mr. Ben Jeddou, a former judge and an independent politician, said he felt the Tunisian smugglers were connected to Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, a Qaeda affiliate that was recently involved in establishing guerrilla training camps and laying mines in a mountainous area near the border with Algeria.Some suspects detained in Mr. Belaid’s assassination in February were members of Ansar al-Sharia, a Salafist group in Tunisia also known to have links with Al Qaeda. The group was also behind an attack on the United States Embassy in Tunis in September, and its leader, Abu Ayad, had trained and fought with Qaeda operatives in Afghanistan.American telephone intercepts have shown that Abu Ayad was in contact with Al Qaeda at the time of the embassy assault in Tunis, Tunisian officials have said.The government’s revelations about the suspects may assuage some anger among opposition groups who have accused the government, and specifically Ennahda, the moderate Islamist party that leads the governing coalition, of being too lenient in its treatment of Islamists and allowing the killings to occur.Ennahda has condemned the killings and accused those behind them of trying to derail the transition to democracy.Opposition demonstrators gathered sporadically on Friday on the main Habib Bourguiba thoroughfare here, shouting slogans but flagging rapidly in the blistering heat. Protesters have also begun to camp out in front of the National Constituent Assembly building.Mr. Ben Jeddou, who assumed the Interior Ministry post in a cabinet reshuffle after Mr. Belaid’s assassination, rejected the opposition’s accusations of incompetence or lack of will.“If we inherited anything from the former regime, we inherited specialized security forces and people with enough expertise,” he said.Besides seeking the killers and smugglers, his ministry has moved against groups recruiting men to fight in Syria, blocking 4,500 from joining. Government forces have also broken up training camps on the Tunisia border, Mr. Ben Jeddou said.Ennahda supporters said they were confident the government would survive.“People on the left accuse us of being with the jihadists, and the Salafists accuse us of being a party that is not connected to Islam,” said Munir Argoubi, a teacher and an Ennahda activist. “That makes us happy. It means we are in the middle, where we want to be.”He and other Ennahda supporters predicted their party would gain a larger share of the vote next time. “This middle ground is very big,” he said.In every neighborhood in Tunis, and throughout the country, are self-organized groups of youths and activists, some Ennahda members and others part of the so-called League for the Protection of the Revolution. Critics complain they are local militias used by Ennahda to intimidate opponents.A few dozen members of these groups attended a planned demonstration in support of Ennahda in downtown Tunis after Friday prayers, but they spent most of the time arguing among themselves. “We are here to protect the revolution, and its gains,” said one demonstrator, Faouzi Majdoub, a middle-aged man who said he worked in insurance. “We want the government to stay and hold elections.”Most of the government’s supporters belittled the protests.“They will bury Brahmi and go home,” Imed Dghij, leader of a self-organized group of revolutionaries, said of the opposition groups. “They will not be able to do anything.”The real threat, he said, is from members of the former government who wantd to regain power and reverse the revolution. He had up to 70 men ready to defend his neighborhood, he said. “You have to understand, Tunisia is run by the neighborhoods, and we run the neighborhoods.”