It looks as though the “super PAC” era is coming to New York.A federal appeals court on Thursday ruled that a conservative group supporting Joseph J. Lhota, the Republican nominee for mayor of New York City, can immediately begin accepting contributions of any size because New York State’s limit on donations to independent political committees is probably unconstitutional.The ruling, 12 days before the mayoral election, is not likely to change the dynamics of the race, given the wide lead of the Democratic candidate, Bill de Blasio, and a presumed reluctance by many potential big donors to donate to an underdog candidate this late in the game.But an end to limits on contributions to independent political groups could have a much bigger impact next year, when voters will decide whether to re-elect Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, and will determine which party controls the State Senate — a long-running battle in which independent spending could make a significant difference.“This could usher in an era where super PACs call the shots in campaigns all over the state, not just in the city,” said David Donnelly, the executive director of the Public Campaign Action Fund, which advocates public financing of elections.Mr. Donnelly called the lawsuit challenging the limit on contributions to independent committees “part of a concerted effort around the country to shred any campaign finance laws that are still left.” Similar laws have been struck down in other states, after the Supreme Court’s landmark campaign finance decision in the Citizens United case.State law currently limits individual contributions to independent-expenditure committees to $150,000 per year. The group that challenged that limit said that it wanted to help elect conservative candidates locally, and was trying to protect its First Amendment rights. The group, New York Progress and Protection PAC, said that an Alabama businessman, Shaun McCutcheon, had pledged to contribute at least $200,000 to the group, and that other donors were likely to make similar donations.“Even though time is quite short, they’ll make as vigorous an effort as possible in the remaining time to raise and spend money for speech in support of Lhota,” said Michael A. Carvin, a lawyer for New York Progress and Protection PAC.Mr. McCutcheon, who is also at the heart of a Supreme Court case challenging caps on individuals’ overall contributions to candidates and parties, does not appear to have given money to candidates in New York over the last decade, according to campaign finance records. But, in a statement issued on Thursday, he said, “I am very pleased that another court has decided to rule in favor of free speech.”New York’s campaign fund-raising laws are already much less restrictive than in many other states. State-level contribution limits are unusually high, loopholes are ample and regulations are rarely enforced. Government watchdogs have fought for years to change the rules, but lawmakers in Albany have shown little interest.Wealthy individuals seeking to donate large sums to New York politicians also already have several techniques for sidestepping contribution limits. For example, Michael R. Bloomberg, the billionaire mayor of New York City, has given millions of dollars to Republicans in the State Senate by directing his contributions to a so-called party housekeeping account, which can accept unlimited donations. And Leonard Litwin, a real estate developer, has legally given hundreds of thousands of dollars to Mr. Cuomo by funneling the contributions through limited liability companies.“At the state level, it’s tough to imagine making things worse,” said Bill Mahoney, an expert on campaign fund-raising at the New York Public Interest Research Group.In New York City, an independent political committee has already played a key role in this year’s mayoral campaign, giving Mr. de Blasio an advantage by financing a series of ads sharply critical of the Democratic primary race’s onetime front-runner, Christine C. Quinn, the City Council speaker, who then lost. There are now at least two independent committees — including the New York Progress and Protection PAC — supporting Mr. Lhota, a former chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, and at least three backing Mr. de Blasio, the city’s public advocate.Mr. de Blasio has generally had a financial advantage over Mr. Lhota. From Sept. 17 to 30, the last period for which campaign fund-raising data was available, Mr. de Blasio collected about $650,000, while Mr. Lhota raised about $280,000. On Monday, Mr. de Blasio held a particularly pricey fund-raiser, headlined by Hillary Rodham Clinton, at which donors who promised to raise at least $25,000 were invited to a private reception.The de Blasio campaign, which has repeatedly sought to link Mr. Lhota to Republican figures thought to be unpopular in New York, on Thursday released a Web video and a statement pressing that attack. “Today’s decision will empower the right-wing billionaires, like the Koch brothers, and Tea Party groups who support Joe Lhota to drown out the voices of New Yorkers,” said Lis Smith, a spokeswoman for the de Blasio campaign.Mr. Lhota declined to comment on the ruling, but his campaign released a lengthy memorandum detailing ways in which Mr. de Blasio has benefited from independent political committees.The ruling, by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, ordered a preliminary injunction that allows the New York Progress and Protection PAC to collect donations of any size. “Every sum that a donor is forbidden to contribute to N.Y.P.P.P. because of this statute reduces constitutionally protected political speech,” the court held in a decision written by Judge Dennis G. Jacobs and joined by Judges Raymond J. Lohier Jr. and John G. Koeltl.The ruling reversed a decision issued last week by Judge Paul A. Crotty of Federal District Court in Manhattan, who said issuing an injunction this close to the Nov. 5 election would be too disruptive.The appellate court ruling applies only to the pro-Lhota committee; the litigation over whether the state’s limit is constitutional and will apply in future campaigns will continue. But the appellate court said the challenge to the law had a “substantial likelihood of success,” noting that many other federal courts had struck down similar laws.“Few contested legal questions are answered so consistently by so many courts and judges,” Judge Jacobs wrote.The New York attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, a Democrat, had defended the law in court, and he said last week that it was “unquestionably constitutional.” A spokesman for Mr. Schneiderman, Damien LaVera, said on Thursday that the attorney general was “deeply disappointed with this decision.”And Lawrence D. Norden, the deputy director of the Democracy Program of the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University School of Law, which seeks to curb the influence of money in politics, said, “If this decision holds, there should be real concern that what we’re going to end up with in New York State is what we have on the federal level, which is candidates being sponsored like racehorses by very wealthy individuals.”But Terence J. Pell, the president of the Center for Individual Rights, which was co-counsel for New York Progress and Protection PAC, called the ruling “a victory for the citizens of New York.”“With this decision, New York City voters will now get a more democratic mayoral race, one with an even financial playing field,” Mr. Pell said. “This will result in a campaign where ideas speak rather than money.”