The last honest-to-God election in New York City began on the day the World Trade Center towers fell: 9/11 was Primary Day, till the voting booths shuttered that morning. And in the dozen years since, New Yorkers have witnessed a great buckling of the political landscape: three terms of Michael Bloomberg, coming after eight years of Rudolph Giuliani. Even if you stipulate, as the G.O.P. kingmakers know, that Rudy and Mike are not real Republicans, the fact remains: the most progressive city west of Amsterdam and east of San Francisco has not elected a Democrat since 1989.New York City stands at a crossroads. Things are good for many, but not for all. The balance between the positives and the hazards could swing either way. In the first couple of years after the Great Recession, the economy’s growth, nearly 3 percent per year, outpaced the rise in national G.D.P. In 2011, 6.6 percent of the city’s households had income greater than $200,000 a year, while a third of the city’s population survives on Medicaid. Manhattan has become a tech rival to Silicon Valley, and bike lanes have come to Brownsville — a Brooklyn neighborhood where 4 out of 10 residents live below the poverty line. Wall Street, Midtown and the N.Y.P.D. are happy. Crime continues to decline: only one precinct, in East New York, has more violent crime than the Upper East Side faced two decades ago. And the population is growing. For all the fears of jihad, the end of capitalism and the advent of superstorms, the years since 9/11 have witnessed the arrival of a new generation. Perhaps as many as a third of the city’s residents did not live here a decade ago. And all those newcomers have contributed to the prize of this electoral season: the minority majority.I followed the campaign for eight months, as the pack running for City Hall grew to a dozen. In pain and sympathy, I watched the marathon of mayoral forums — there have been more than a hundred this year alone. And I’ve seen each of the candidates up close. I watched them on the stump, listened to them go off the record, observed them endure tales of complaint. They heard about the rise in racial profiling, public-school field tests, utility rates, pushcart-vendor fees and fatal subway pushings. They’ve debated the wisdom of punishing johns, deploying police drones and massacring rats. And they’ve vowed to wage war on post-Sandy mold, the inequality of garbage-removal services and the sufferings of Central Park carriage horses. Witnessed up close, the campaign engenders a creeping unease: the discomfort of watching an anesthetized body politic struggling to revive itself.You feel it in the mounting groundswell of angst and aspiration: the palpable sense that, as Anthony Weiner told me, “a pressure valve’s being released.” On the rarest of occasions, the candidates might even address the issues that are unlikely to gain headlines but that will pose urgent challenges to the victor. The list is long and growing: the public-employee unions — 147 bargaining units — working without contracts and hungering for retroactive pay; the rise in city pensions and health care payouts (pension obligations are projected to be more than $8 billion a year — more than the city’s combined operating budget for police, fire and corrections annually); the mayor’s plan to rezone East Midtown (among other things, opening up 73 blocks around Grand Central to super-skyscrapers); the first phase of the emergency measures needed to harden the city ahead of the next Sandy (projected cost: $20 billion); the mess that is public housing (approximately 400,000 New Yorkers trying to survive in 334 developments, another 225,000 in Section 8 housing and the all-but-orphaned-by-Washington New York City Housing Authority, which has a backlog of 220,000 repairs and faces $6 billion in unmet capital needs, a black hole expected to more than double in five years).And now a great wave of change is set to break over the city. Voters must choose not only the mayor but also the comptroller, public advocate, the borough presidents and nearly half of the City Council come this fall. The campaign is a carnival, and yet in rare bright moments, it can seem a hopeful, ennobling, pluralistic spectacle. For all the pandering and patronage, you also see flickers of unfashionable civic spirit, of New Yorkers devoted to their city. As much as he loved to be the engineer in charge, Bloomberg also took the two-steps-forward-one-and-a-half-steps-back gains of the Giuliani years and recast the city’s image: from ungovernable to improvable. The worry that hangs over the longest race for City Hall in New York history is whether any of these 11 men and 1 woman can keep that prospect alive.A NEW DAWN FOR THE DEMOCRATSOn the frigid night of Martin Luther King Jr.’s actual birthday, in January, the Rev. Al Sharpton was presiding over the year’s first major Democratic mayoral forum. The House of Justice, the headquarters of his National Action Network, is no more than a storefront, its walls covered with outsize mirrors and enlarged portraits of Sharpton — cover shots from the glory days. Nearly 400 men and women sat in coats on hard chairs, listening intently and, when spurred by a catch word or cue, heckling. Outside, on the snowy sidewalk of 145th Street, loudspeakers blasted the goings-on, and young men eating pizza slices leaned close to the building’s fogged glass.Five Democrats lined the stage, four of them men sitting in a grim row: John C. Liu, the comptroller and star of the city’s emergent Asian communities, an erstwhile actuary whose campaign finances have been the subject of a federal investigation since 2009; Sal F. Albanese, a former schoolteacher and 15-year veteran of City Council, who claimed a war chest of $41,000 and a confidence that he is running on behalf of “ordinary New Yorkers” even as he remained unknown to nearly all in the audience (and, if the polls are to be believed, would-be voters); William C. Thompson Jr., Liu’s predecessor as comptroller, a former president of the Board of Education (long before Bloomberg replaced it in the name of “mayoral control”), who gained a measure of fame as the no-name who came within 4.6 percentage points of defeating Bloomberg the last time around; Bill de Blasio, the public advocate, holds an elected office few could define, and whose position, he admits, is largely a bully pulpit.In the far corner, in a chair angled slightly askew, sat Christine C. Quinn, speaker of the City Council for seven years and the politician who has been, depending on your vantage, either the mayor’s most loyal partner or most powerful critic, and who had, not coincidentally, since she assumed the job, the best odds to succeed him in City Hall.Sharpton has long since shed the bulk and anger that accompanied his rise in the political arena, in the days when he, too, once dreamed of the mayoralty. On this occasion he played the urbane host. He asked the candidates to address “the distinct problems” of “the black and Latino communities.” “We live in the Big Apple,” he said, and “we can’t get a bite.”The candidates delivered their set pieces, but they formed an anxious chorus. They cherry-picked from one another, recycling glib hits on Bloomberg: his “demonizing” of teachers, “union busting” and “subversion of democracy.” They refrained, though, from lateral attacks.When Thompson stood, his left hand dipped into a trouser pocket. The message was clear: The race is long, folks. I’m in no rush. At 60, “Billy” Thompson possesses a courtly bearing and a calm voice. The knock, as he knows well, is that he’s too soft to win. (Soon after this gathering, I would hear Thompson defend himself before a group of business and civic leaders in Midtown: “It’s New York City,” he said. “If you don’t scream and if you don’t holler, you’re ‘mild-mannered.’ If you don’t try and throw someone down the stairs, you lack fire in the belly.”)In Harlem, Thompson asked, “What is it that distinguishes me from my colleagues?” Then he answered, “My background.” He did not need to detail it: the crowd knew. Nearby sat political powers from the Bronx, Harlem and central Brooklyn. The few white faces present belonged mostly to the clutch of reporters, many in their 20s, huddled against a wall. Thompson lives in Harlem, but he grew up in Bedford-Stuyvesant, heir to a Brooklyn power broker. This election, the son insisted, was about two questions: “Are we going to go down a different path, change direction? Are we going to have a mayor who represents all the people of the City of New York?” The lines, though, did not bring down the house.When Liu stood, he thrust a fist into the air before speaking. The comptroller possesses the bearing and subtlety of a linebacker. His square head is buzzed at the sides. He is, a rival strategist tells me with envy, the “Energizer Bunny” of the campaign. With a madcap populism, Liu is prone to disquisitions so extensive that a listener grows fearful of their destination. (He likes to warn of the coming “feudalism,” for instance, when “the serfs and peasants are held hostage to the lords and barons, hoping and praying that they don’t leave the city.”) His Flushing staccato can come rapid-fire, but he can also downshift in a moment, his voice slowing, as if freighted with compassion. In Harlem, the amplitude worked: Liu connected. He gave thanks to Reverend Sharpton and the legacy of Dr. King “for giving me this level playing field.” His “incredible colleagues,” he said, nodding to the cast on stage, “have spent entire careers in politics and government.” “Their families,” he added, gaining speed, “have been in government. Me? I’m an immigrant.” The line, unexpected and revelatory, scored the night’s high note. “Brother Liu,” the shouts came. “You tell it, Brother Liu.” (On a later occasion he would go further: “My neck,” Liu would say, “is still stamped ‘Made in Taiwan.’ ”)When de Blasio rose, it was hard at first to track his words. At 6-foot-5, he towered over the crowd. De Blasio may not be a graceful presence, but he is at home on the soapbox. As public advocate, he has posted 220 videos to date on his YouTube channel (with its 58 subscribers). He held the cord of the microphone in his left hand, à la Sinatra, as he unspooled a string of one-liners. He bemoaned that “we’re living a tale of two cities,” denounced the mayor’s “ill-gotten gains” (the third term) and insisted that he had “stood up” to Bloomberg. “I have never hesitated to take him on,” de Blasio thundered. “I don’t care how many billions he has.”As her rivals took their turns, Quinn sat placidly in the corner. Yet when she spoke of Ray Kelly, the police commissioner, and said any mayor would be lucky to have him, the boos poured forth. She stood her ground, and by the evening’s close, comporting herself, as always, more with the air of a hostess than coequal, the speaker bussed each of her rivals. The House of Justice emptied. Except for Liu, who stayed on, grinning, eager to shake the last hand.WHY THE ONES WITH THE LEAST ARE SOUGHT AFTER THE MOSTSince winter, the Democrats have been fixated on the first finish line: the runoff. To win the primary on Sept. 10, a candidate must gain at least 40 percent of the vote. Among the Democrats, given the number of contestants, a runoff between the top two finishers — to take place on Oct. 1 — is all but assured. Despite the recent electoral history, registered Democrats still outnumber Republicans six to one in the city. As a result, it’s tough to find any observer — even among the real estate, finance or legal elites — who does not expect the Democratic primary to signal the eventual winner on Nov. 5.Historians, though, may look back at this election as the “minority majority” watershed — when nonwhite voters made up as much as 58 percent of the Democratic primary, and a bit less of the general election. The 2010 census pegged the city’s nonwhite population at 67 percent. In large part, the minority majority is immigrant. But it is by no means unified. Political scientists talk less about Catholics and Jews and Latinos and blacks now and more about a raft of surging forces: Orthodox Jews and Spanish-speaking Pentecostals, new arrivals from the Caribbean and South Asia.This race will bring the trend lines, long coursing out of view, to the surface: the city’s diversity is becoming ever more diverse. Manhattan is getting whiter, as the ethnic and religious mix of Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx and even Staten Island deepens. The Asian community, as Liu told me, “is growing rapidly — everywhere.” Asians, Liu insists, will make up 15 percent of the primary vote, while Stephen Levin, the City Council member whose district includes Williamsburg, predicts a 30 percent jump in turnout among the Satmar Hasidim.The candidates will swear to the need to build coalitions. Race-based politics, they insist, are a thing of the past — like the bosses who ruled Tammany or a billionaire willing to spend at least $174 on every vote, as Bloomberg did in 2009. But in practice they resort to the tactics of old: pitting the outer boroughs against Manhattan and playing to a perceived ethnic, religious or racial base. The demographics, though, foretell another reckoning. “The realities of the minority majority have not yet been internalized,” according to Bruce Gyory, a veteran political consultant. “If a mayoral candidate starts with a white base,” he wrote in an e-mail, “to win a runoff or a two-person general election, they would have to carry 40 percent of the aggregate minority vote to win.” On the other hand, Gyory continued, “if a mayoral candidate begins with a unified minority base” — no easy feat, he noted — “they would need one-third of the white vote to win.” When we first spoke, Gyory was without a horse in the race. By spring, he was advising the Thompson campaign.TURNING GARBAGE INTO POLITICAL THEATEROn East 93rd Street, at a senior center in Yorkville Gardens, the smell of disinfectant floated up from the carpet, and the candidates came, one by one, to stand in the first-floor rec room, before a baby grand, to address another overflowing swarm. It was early on a cold, soggy Saturday in February. Liu, Thompson and de Blasio trooped through before Quinn. After her, Albanese would find the room nearly empty.The attendees devoured Quinn. It was an ugly sight, a confluence of seniors and well-heeled professionals shouting her down. At issue was the city’s plan to build a garbage facility on East 91st Street, inaptly named a marine transfer station. The dump on the edge of the East River was a sore point for the crowd. Garbage trucks would ascend to it along an access ramp cutting through Asphalt Green, home to the neighborhood’s little-league and soccer fields.“Hang on!” Quinn yelled. “If you want an answer, you have to listen. You can scream and yell. You could throw soft things after, but you have got to let me answer.” The shouts only gained force. “Not getting my vote!” one woman near me cried. “Not my vote either!” another said.Afterward, riding with her in her city Suburban, I marveled at the cool Quinn displayed in enemy territory. She knew, she told me, the reception would be chilly. Why then did she come? “ ’Cause you gotta go,” she shot back, before going into a soliloquy on respect. But many in the crowd, I ventured, would seem to be her constituents: women, working and white. “True,” she said, but you can’t always get everyone to agree. I reminded her of a phrase I’d heard her deploy often: We may not always agree, but if we sit at the table long enough, we can find a solution. She cut me short: “There isn’t a creative solution to everything.”Days later, I noticed a headline in The Post, “Posh East Side Trash Talkers Boo Quinn,” then a glowing editorial titled “Quinn’s Trash Talk.” “Good for her,” The Post gushed, “for having the guts to speak the truth while standing in the lion’s den.”I’d been played. Quinn’s team suggested I come. They wanted me to see the angry crowd, and the candidate with strength and principles who could stand up to it. It was a performance, I realized, intended to capture the spirit of the man Quinn reveres, and who had recently died: Ed Koch.The speaker is a tangle of incongruities, a study in self-control and unfettered impulse. She can crack a knuckle in my presence, and apologize at once: “I know, Kim hates it, too,” she says, referring to Kim Catullo, the corporate lawyer she married last year. She can massage, backtrack and self-reveal, all in one breath. She alone among the candidates picks me out of a crowd, hastens to say hello. She is known too for a lack of polish. The tongue, to be sure, is salty. “BlackRock is focused on veterans’ [expletive],” she said, when I noted a writing pad bearing the logo of the world’s largest asset manager on her conference table. “Stuff,” she added with a smile, once again correcting herself.Quinn can walk me through the brambles of the city budget, and the successive scandals over the byzantine City Council earmarks, the so-called slush-fund investigation — a probe of the City Council’s hidden use of money accounts with fictitious names — and a separate inquiry into members’ financial fraud that put three of her Council colleagues in prison. She can shed her porcelain veneer, turn testy, admit it and inspire sympathy. But for a candidate who has spent much of the race apparently preferring to see herself in the mayor’s company than her competitors’, Quinn bristles at comparisons with Bloomberg. “The mayor and I have a great working relationship,” she told me. “We don’t agree on everything, but we recognize that we’re both two smart, competent people who have focused on where we could find agreement and commonality.”THE NEW URBAN FEAR: MOLDOn a clear night in winter, the circus set up in East New York. Beneath hulking projects in the darkness beyond, the St. Paul Community Baptist Church glowed in a wash of klieg lights. A NY1 TV truck, about a dozen cops and a line of young whites marked the spot.St. Paul’s is cavernous; its vaulted wooden ceiling lends it the feel of a barn. Six candidates sat below. Two were Republicans: Joe Lhota, the newest entrant, and Tom Allon, at the time a community-newspaper and magazine executive. On a stage that has hosted every mayor since Koch, the six took on a single topic: housing.“We expect all the candidates to say they’re for affordable housing and for more senior housing and low-income housing,” said the Rev. David Brawley, speaking into a headset microphone. “But that ain’t good enough.” The facts, he said, tell an epic story, replete with highs and lows. The pastor raised the specter of 1977 — the last time the city faced a race as wide open and diverse — and what has been called the death spiral that threatened the city. But even Koch, the unlikely winner of that election, he hastened to add, built 190,000 units of affordable housing.The candidates made their own vows — at least 60,000 units over four years was the figure they settled on. Once again they rushed to outdo one another, and again revealed more similarities than differences. Lhota was strangely mute — not uttering a word for the first 31 minutes. When at last he spoke, he fell quiet again within three minutes. Liu talked of “unscrupulous landlords,” echoing Quinn. De Blasio again lamented the “tale of two cities.” “Remember the numbers,” he roared. “One percent of our pension-fund money goes into investments like affordable housing.” Thompson reprised a favored line: “We are being squeezed and priced out of the City of New York,” before Quinn retold a keynote of what aides call “her story”: “My parents were able to rent a rent-controlled two-bedroom in Inwood.” That’s how, she said, they managed “on a firefighter’s salary to send their daughters to college.”On it went, until a white man from South Brooklyn with cropped gray hair and a goatee spoke about life after Sandy: about sewage and seawater, mold and a FEMA trailer. His neighborhood, he said, might lose “more homes after Sandy than during.” Red pen in hand, de Blasio leapt to respond, offering a “four-point plan to address the mold problem” — before Liu threw a jab. “It’s quite possible” that Bloomberg, he said, “does not know what mold is.”Laughter filled the pews, but the night soon threatened to turn maudlin. Rossana from Brownsville spoke of more mold, her two daughters and son, and asthma. De Blasio said he could sympathize, pulling an inhaler from inside his suit coat. His family, too, suffers from asthma. Sandy was a disaster, he said. But the grim state of public housing in New York City goes back to its birth, he said: “Because Robert Moses didn’t like people of color, and didn’t like poor people.”Allon, though, might have scored the most one-liners. Early on, de Blasio turned to him and whispered, “Jesus,” and asked how he came up with them. “Brevity,” Allon replied, “is the soul of wit.” Months later, when I asked why he’d entered the race, Allon said, “I thought a Jewish guy, son of Holocaust survivors, former public-school teacher, business entrepreneur, a reasonably articulate and thoughtful person, could do well.” By then, however, he had dropped out.TOO MANY REPUBLICANS?One Sunday in late winter I went to the Clearview Golf Course clubhouse in Bayside, Queens, to spend the afternoon with the Northeast Queens Republican Club. For years, the Republican Party has cleared the field, getting the man, or woman, its leaders want to run. “The state leadership has a pretty good handle on their people,” says Bill Cunningham, a consultant who once worked for Pat Moynihan and served as Mayor Bloomberg’s first spokesman. “And they usually do as told.” Not this time. By March, four men were in the race on the Republican side: Lhota; Allon; George T. McDonald, an advocate for the homeless and head of the Doe Fund; and John A. Catsimatidis, a billionaire known as “the Gristedes guy” but whose portfolio resembles an oligarch’s: supermarkets, condo towers, airplanes and oil and gas. Catsimatidis wanted to run in 2009. He even had the nomination, he told me. But the mayor, he said, called him to his townhouse, and declared that he wanted to run. This time, Catsimatidis told me, there will be no retreat.In Queens, after the Pledge of Allegiance and a moment of silence for the troops, Lhota unfurled a brief story of his life. Behind him, a string of helium balloons formed a rainbow of red, white and blue. Before him, three dozen of the faithful sat in tight rows.“New York City is in my blood,” Lhota said. “I’m one of the few candidates running who was actually born here.” One grandfather was a firefighter; the other drove a cab. Lhota dresses “smart,” as it used to be said: fitted blue blazer, four brass buttons on the sleeves, striped tie, coral-blue shirt, trim copper-gray beard. A cue card tucked in his hands (names of locals to thank), he searched for connections to Queens. “I was born in the Bronx, son of a New York City cop, a lieutenant, who came to the 105th Precinct, when promoted to sergeant, in Queens.” Lhota is known as a tough guy, famous for flipping off a Times reporter, but when he speaks, his pursed lips betray an endearing lisp. “I never did live in Queens,” he said, “but I took my freshman year at St. John’s, in Jamaica — so I did travel to Queens all the time.”Lhota was here only to introduce himself. A former investment banker, he served Giuliani for eight years, ultimately as deputy mayor of operations — “basically,” he said, “the C.O.O. of the city.” Lhota stood his progressive ground. “I’m really at odds with the national party,” he said. “I never called myself a ‘militant libertarian,’ ” he assured one questioner. He was “not pro-abortion,” he added, but “pro-choice.” When a questioner bit hard, dragging him through his stance on everything from the 1999 Brooklyn Museum show that featured a painting of the Virgin Mary that incorporated elephant dung to Kendra’s Law to expansions of the rights of the transgendered, Lhota delivered a calm reply, teeth clenched, without the hint of a smile.One of the young Republicans, seated up front, asked about “cutting red tape on the Second Amendment.”“I have always been known to be someone who can cut red tape,” Lhota said. “But when it comes to having firearms in New York City, I am one of the people who believe, as the son of a cop, we need to be certain if you’re going to own a firearm you need to get a background check.” With a half-shake of the head, he added: “I don’t find that a violation of the Second Amendment. I’m sorry.” Lhota had silenced not only the young Republican, but the whole room.The afternoon ended as it opened. The club members repaired to the bar, where amid views of the half-frozen greens, they aired the question posed by the club chairman, who had introduced Lhota. “Are Republicans relevant?”Daniel Halloran was Lhota’s host in Queens. A ruddy-faced, ginger-haired Republican, one of 4 in the 51-seat City Council, Halloran ran for Congress in 2012. He gained fame when it was revealed he was a Theodist, a follower of a neopagan faith that worships Norse gods, but he lost to Grace Meng, the first Asian in the city elected to Congress — a triumph, spoken of in fear or delight, and plied as proof of the Asian muscle. Halloran winced, recalling how Meng’s father was indicted days after her election for a bribery scheme. (In March, Jimmy Meng was sentenced to a month in jail after pleading guilty to wire fraud.) “The problem isn’t Grace per se,” Halloran told me as Lhota waited his turn at the podium. “The problem is the machine around the Asian candidates.” It has, he added, “been willing to cut corners.”Within weeks, Halloran himself was arrested, awakened by F.B.I. agents, at his home in Queens. The preposterous scheme filled the tabloids: Malcolm Smith, a powerful state senator from Queens, who was also arrested, had been angling to buy a legal exemption to run in the Republican mayoral primary. Two days before Lhota appeared at the golf club, Halloran, prosecutors claim, accepted $5,000 in cash from an undercover agent. He took the money, the prosecutors said, for brokering meetings with Queens party bosses. Halloran was caught on tape, with an acknowledgment more honest than any I would hear in nearly 90 interviews. “That’s politics,” he said. “It’s all about how much. Not about whether or will, it’s about how much, and that’s our politicians in New York, they’re all like that, all like that. And they get like that because of the drive that the money does for everything else. You can’t do anything without the [expletive] money.”A NEW ATTRACTION AT THE CARNIVALAt 6 a.m. on a muggy morning in late May, at the intersection of 125th Street and Malcolm X Boulevard, the first TV truck pulled up. By 7:30, the number had grown to 10. There were videographers from Japan and reporters from Scandinavia.Anthony Weiner stood across from an empty lot. One of the first hands he shook belonged to a toddler. His new communications director, Barbara Morgan, hovered close, after a first near-sleepless night on the job. A scattering of volunteers scurried around her, trying to look busy. “Come on guys,” she pleaded. “We’re doing the avail in five.”Weiner’s public debut, in a campaign long deemed impossible, lured a press scrum not seen since the N.Y.P.D. pulled Dominique Strauss-Kahn off an Air France plane at J.F.K. Passers-by could not come close to Weiner. Certainly not Wallace Smallwood. Smallwood, who was 48, was born in the South and raised in the South Bronx. He said he used to work in a parking garage in Midtown. For the last seven years, though, he’d been homeless. He had not come to see Weiner. He’d been on the street that morning, kicked out early from the shelter around the corner. Smallwood spoke softly. He had no interest in Weiner’s use and abuse of social media. He had one simple question about shelters’ services: “Would he do a little more to help the coalition of single men, than just a run-in and run-out?”A reporter displayed the morning’s Daily News, holding up the mock cover buried inside. The headline screamed a reminder of the sext­ing scandal. Weiner leapt to volley. “Actually, they did not put that on their front page,” he said. “Did they?”“What I learned today here,” he went on, “is that people are going to make their determination based on the interests that they think are important. If citizens want to talk to me about my personal failings, that’s their right, and I’m going to do everything I can to answer them.”“Weiner!” a young black man shouted, “you got my vote, brother!”After half an hour, Weiner was on the No. 2 downtown en route to his first radio interview as a candidate. The subway car filled with reporters eager to tweet his every word and movement. A woman wearing a black hijab tried to avert her eyes. “It’s too early for this,” a white man in a suit grunted. Photographers stood on seats; one took to the floor. Through it all, Weiner tried to crack wise. “It’s kind of like being on injured reserve for two years,” he said — a refrain he would deploy often in the days to come. By Penn Station, few commuters remained, and the Muslim woman sneaked a peek.At 8:44 a.m., back aboveground, the flood of drama, the high-water mark in the campaign to date, receded. What remained was a sad, diminished spectacle that revealed the atrophied state of our press corps and candidate pool. Weiner and a half-dozen young men and women, digital recorders aloft, marching down Seventh Avenue South. The wide sidewalks downtown were near empty, gray under grayer skies. The freakish buoyancy of the morning had given way to normalcy, a pre-summer morning in the late Bloomberg era: cyclists in suits, strollers two abreast en route to pre-K. In the campaign’s first hour, Weiner had grabbed the hands of a few dozen citizens, been ribbed by commuters and construction workers and delivered mini-monologues on favored themes: a single-payer health care system for all New Yorkers and protecting the middle class.On the subway platform, a poster advertised a new horror film: “The Purge.” And no matter how long I watched the candidate on his redemption tour, one of his frequent declarations lingered the longest. I heard it first on the No. 2 downtown. As the reporters poured out, and the commuters filled their wake, Weiner bid his fellow passengers goodbye. It seemed a nice gesture, but one that accidentally gave voice to the silent echo of his campaign. “My apologies,” he said, “for the inconvenience.”WHAT IS THIS RACE ABOUT?Quinn walked out at 1 p.m. on a Wednesday in late May, wearing a steely blue jacket and gray slacks. It was a routine news conference — nothing exciting. Twice a month, every year since she became speaker, Quinn has stood behind this lectern in the “red room” (a municipal imitation of the White House press room), its brass seal stamped with the year 1625 and emblazoned with a sailor (clothed), an Indian (naked but for a loincloth) and a wreath of Latin: Sigillum Civitatis Novi Eboraci (“The Seal of the City of New York”), to face the press. But this was Quinn’s first time in public since Weiner joined the fray — and almost immediately dispelled the idea that she had a lock on the race. (By May, Quinn had dropped in the polls from a high of 37 percent who supported her to 25 percent.)The tableau of the Council members onstage — an Italian-American, a Haitian-born American, a Chinese-American, an African-American with Caribbean roots and a Jewish Brooklynite — was an undeniable reflection of the city itself: diversity, ego and inevitable imperfections. As they took turns at the lectern, enumerating the needs of constituents and thanking partners, Quinn measured out their allotted time with the affected ease of a talk-show host. The members got their cameos, but the stage, as always, was Quinn’s.At 1:23 p.m., she sounded the bell: “Any questions on the legislation?” City Hall reporters know the drill. They can pose questions pertaining only to the issues the speaker has voiced. Anything else — anything off-topic — must come at the end, in the final throes of the news conference.By 1:26 p.m., the rainbow of Council members was gone. “I’m gonna have to go off-topic here,” Quinn said. A camerawoman in the back of the room shouted from behind her tripod: “Do you have a comment about Weiner?”On cue, Quinn uncorked a cackle. “What a well-developed and, you know, a surprising question!” She went on: “Anthony Weiner has joined the race for mayor, as is his right to do. But that really doesn’t change my perspective or plan in this race at all.”She seemed to hold every facial muscle in check. “Look, this is a race about the future of New York City.” Her body stiffened, jaw tightened and arms locked onto the lectern. “And from my perspective, the job of the next mayor is to make New York City a greater place for opportunity for all of those hardworking folks and hardworking families out there who’re trying so hard to get to the middle class or stay in the middle class.”Quinn flipped through her record of “preventing the layoff of teachers,” of fighting for the “rights of tenants,” of “expanding manufacturing jobs in Brooklyn during the recession,” of “tangible results that have made people’s lives better.” But the air had changed. Those present witnessed a rare moment: the transformation of a politician. A speaker in cruise control had become a candidate in defensive-driver mode. Weiner was the catalyst, but the rumblings had been there for months — the “drag on her ability to take flight,” as one strategist on the sidelines put it. For those who dislike Quinn, it’s a wealth of negatives: blunt edges, a perceived coziness with developers, subservience to the mayor (above all, the Faustian entanglement on term limits). She gets things done, many argue, but at what cost?“That’s the record I’m running on,” Quinn said. “And regardless of who enters the race, there’s no one in the race or no one on the horizon who, quite frankly, has a record as detailed and long as mine of delivering for New Yorkers. So that’s what I’m gonna talk about.”Except she was confronted by a stream of questions about Weiner. Could she rate the job he did in Washington? She balked: “It’s not my job to analyze Anthony Weiner’s record.” What did she think of his asking for “a second chance”? She shot back: “That’s a question for voters and for New Yorkers to answer.” And when a reporter persisted — “You shared your own experiences during your own difficulties. Do you think he deserves the second chance?” — she ended the show: “You know, that’s a question he’s asked, and you know New Yorkers are gonna have to answer it. You know, I’m proud about what I’ve been able to overcome in my life by asking for help and getting help. But that’s a question that happened with former Congressman Weiner that he’s going to have to go out there and talk to New Yorkers about — that very different situation. Thank you, thank you. . . .”WAITING FOR A ‘YUSUF’Two clocks hang over the race. One marks time in the race for the mayoralty, the other in the battle to define the Bloomberg legacy. An actual “countdown clock,” as the mayor calls it, hangs in City Hall in the Bullpen, the warren of carrels where Bloomberg holds court. The clock, a red-light digital reminder on the wall in the snack corner, above the high-grain cereals and fresh-cut fruit, marks the mayor’s remaining days in office and implores the staff to “Make Every Day Count.”The third term, the mayor’s aides say, may end up as Bloomberg’s most ambitious. The East Midtown rezoning is scheduled for a vote by year’s end. (The rush is on, Liu says, “to squeeze the money out of New York’s air.”) But Bloomberg, the candidates note with more envy than dismay, has defied the politics of old. “This mayor is a one-off,” is how Lou Harris, the father of American political polling, now 92, put it to me. “Bloomberg’s destroyed whatever was still standing” of machine politics, Harris added. “He’s broken all the rules, for a long time to come.” Yet the mayor has also bequeathed a contradiction: the man who has everything cannot find a loyal heir.Many of the candidates have been campaigning, as Thompson admitted, “since Mike Bloomberg appeared on the scene.” Act 1 was Quinn’s coronation waltz: “This is your year,” Mickey Carroll, the veteran political reporter who runs the Quinnipiac polls, told her at Koch’s funeral in February. Act 2 was the return of the prodigal son Weiner (a performance that began in this magazine). Today, as the curtain rises on Act 3, it may be easy to predict who’ll lose but not who will win. As the numbers shift, each campaign fears “a Yusuf,” political shorthand for the shooting in the summer of 1989 of Yusuf Hawkins, the 16-year-old African-American killed by white youths in Bensonhurst.“Things always happen to change the equation,” Bill Cunningham told me. “Something comes up that scrambles the race.” The list is campaign lore: John Lindsay buried by the snowstorm of ’69; Koch verging on a fourth term, until Hawkins’s murder tipped the nomination to David Dinkins; and the unprecedented: a Wall Street entrepreneur, better known in Davos than the Bronx, who was double-digits behind the Democrats when the twin towers collapsed and spent $70 million to win the election. Three candidates — Quinn, Weiner and Thompson — lead the Democratic polls. In a rare moment, near winter’s end, a strategist for one of them came clean. “There is one thing that keeps me up at night,” he said. “It’s the Big Question.” I could hear the capital letters rise as his pitch dropped. “What is that thing that’s going to happen? Because you know it: anything can happen. And it always does. It’s New York.”