Ladies and gentlemen, clear your calendars and chug those double espressos: the 51st New York Film Festival is about to begin. Newly recharged, this venerated annual event has reigned supreme since 1963 as the city’s premier cinematic happening, and its lofty position remains secure.Then, the marquee names included Orson Welles, Robert Bresson and Chris Marker. This year’s stars include Spike Jonze, Jia Zhangke and, back again, the late, great Marker, whose 1960 film, “Description of a Struggle,” is one of 202 (!) titles in the festival’s avant-garde program. Also on tap: the latest from the guy who made “Love Actually” and a vast Jean-Luc Godard retrospective.The Godard survey (Oct. 9 through 30) can be seen as part of an inaugural statement of intent from Kent Jones in his first year as the festival’s director of programming. Although the retrospective might draw more patrons at another date, its scope — 51 features and 30 shorts, with possible additions to come — speaks to Mr. Jones’s ambitions for the festival, as does the genre, narrative and tonal diversity of all the selections. This year includes what may be an unprecedented number of comedies for what has, on occasion, sometimes felt like an event guided more by the desire to épater la bourgeoisie than to celebrate cinema.The bourgeoisie is likely to be more rocked than shocked by the opening-night film, “Captain Phillips,” an electric moral tale from Paul Greengrass, who was at the festival in 2002 with “Bloody Sunday.” Based on yet another upsetting face-off, “Captain Phillips” revisits the true story of Richard Phillips (Tom Hanks), an American taken hostage in 2009 by Somalis who commandeered his cargo ship in the Indian Ocean. Surprising and satisfyingly complex, it opens as a tale of men and work, then revs up into a camera-shuddering thriller, only to deepen. It’s a tough, political look at power and the wretched of the earth and is likely to send at least some first-night revelers running for the Alice Tully bar.Other strong selections during the festival’s initial stretch are two of the movies of the year: “A Touch of Sin,” a harrowing, multithreaded drama about life, death and the wages of capitalism in China, from Mr. Jia, and the latest from Joel and Ethan Coen, the sublime “Inside Llewyn Davis.”  Each played to acclaim at Cannes in May, as did another New York Film Festival highlight: “The Last of the Unjust,” a three-and-a-half-hour documentary from Claude Lanzmann about history and its responsibilities, hinged to Benjamin Murmelstein, the last president of the Jewish Council in the Theresienstadt ghetto in Czechoslovakia. “The Last of the Unjust” includes footage that Mr. Lanzmann shot for his 1985 opus, “Shoah,” but didn’t use. “The Last of the Unjust” has American distribution, as do most of the titles in the main slate.Another main-slate selection, Frederick Wiseman’s “At Berkeley,” is an engrossing four-hour inquiry into the University of California, Berkeley, both as a bucolic stand-alone school and as part of a larger troubled institution. If you miss it, you can immerse yourself in the festival’s three separate documentary programs. The first, “Motion Portraits” (8 movies about people) starts on Saturday and is followed by “Applied Science” (three movies about projects) and “How Democracy Works Now” (10 features about immigration reform from Michael Camerini and Shari Robertson).One of the essential titles in this year’s festival is “The Missing Picture.” Directed by Rithy Panh, this haunting, at times shocking movie — part memoir, part indictment — fills the void suggested by its title: it creates an image of madness, specifically the Khmer Rouge’s rule over Cambodia in the 1970s. When he was a boy, Mr. Panh and his family were forced from their home in 1975, the year the Khmer Rouge seized control. Only he survived. With extraordinary grace, he tells his story and that of his ravaged country, using archival visual material, a heartbreakingly intimate narration (spoken by another man in mellifluous English) and small clay figures that, as they are whittled away, become stand-ins for the men, women and children subjected to incomprehensible horror.One strong title screening on Sunday that deserves an adventurous audience and needs a gutsy distributor is “Child of God.” Based on the Cormac McCarthy novel of the same title, it was directed by the apparently tireless James Franco, whom it’s time to start taking seriously, at least as a filmmaker. The movie, stark and often gravely beautiful, features a heroic performance from Scott Haze as an outcast who, with a gun in hand, descends into soul-crippling isolation and then spirals into madness in the Tennessee backwoods. Despite a few missteps, including a scene of on-screen defecation that’s so aggressively up close and personal that it approaches 3-D, Mr. Franco settles into his story with confidence, lyricism and compassion.Also playing on Sunday is “Norte, the End of History,” from the Filipino filmmaker Lav Diaz, which tells the story of two strangers whose lives are tragically intertwined when a rich man commits a double murder, and a poor man is forced to take the fall. With a calm, precise visual style — his fluid, understated camera movements almost hover at the edge of your consciousness — and a four-hour-plus running time, Mr. Diaz doesn’t just tell a story about two men, he also shows you the world in which such stories and men emerge. He takes his time (and yours) to move in and around spaces rather than skipping through them, to accumulate details and play with ordinary daily rhythms. At once lifelike and a scrupulous imitation of life, the movie turns time into a bridge that allows you to cross into the lives of others.“Norte, the End of History” can be tough going, and three hours probably would have been as effective as four, but it’s one of the highlights of this year’s New York Film Festival, which makes it a must-see. I’m less enamored of some of the more commercial titles that are also on tap, including “Le Week-End,” Roger Michell’s smug, grating trifle about a bitchy British couple (Jim Broadbent and Lindsay Duncan) who prop up their sagging marriage with a trip to Paris and a few nods to Mr. Godard. Yet “Le Week-End,” along with the likes of “Alan Partridge,” a moderately funny comedy with Steve Coogan, signals that the festival is shaking off orthodoxies about what kinds of movies should be, deserve to be, in a cinematic showcase like this one.Last Friday, under a canopy of trees on the Lincoln Center campus, Mr. Jones talked about the past and future of the festival, which he took over from Richard Peña, who retired in 2012 after 25 years. (Mr. Peña’s position as the programmer of the Film Society of Lincoln Center was so demanding that it was divided into two jobs: Mr. Jones programs the festival, and Dennis Lim is responsible for Film Society programming the rest of the year.)“This festival is pretty unique,” Mr. Jones said. “There are a lot of festivals that are about selling movies, documentary festivals, festivals about food.” The New York Film Festival, by contrast, represents “an idea of cinema,” as he put it, one that is perhaps best explained by the selections, their approaches to realism, the world and us.Trying to get at that idea of cinema as opposed to, say, being overwhelmed by the screens that surround us every waking hour — inundating us in undifferentiated visual noise — suggests why Mr. Jones wanted to fold into this year’s festival a comprehensive Godard retrospective, one that would showcase an entire lifelong engagement with questions of cinema.“What Godard is saying,” Mr. Jones said, “what he’s always said, is that we have to pay as much attention to the image as we did to the word. We can’t wait for the word to explain the image. We can’t let the word overwhelm the image. I’ve spent half of my life thinking about Godard, sometimes arguing with him really stupidly and then finally being overwhelmed with his films over and over and over again.”In 1963, tucked among editorials about Gov. George Wallace of Alabama and food production shortfalls in Communist countries, The New York Times ran one titled “The Film as Art,” which I love to return to when thinking about this festival. The occasion was the very first New York Film Festival, which “serves to point up the difference in quality between the film as product and the film as art.” There were no guarantees that the festival’s 19 foreign and 2 American selections would be great, the editorial warned. But their showings “dignify movies in this country; tell the world that we too are interested in cultural efforts. Hopefully, our own serious filmmakers will be encouraged and recognized. All this can broaden the spectrum.”That may sound awfully corny, but more than a half-century later, it still feels right on point.