ATHENS — Officials representing Greece’s international creditors were back in Athens on Monday, three weeks after mass layoffs at the state broadcaster ERT prompted a political crisis that led one party to quit the shaky coalition government.Representatives of the troika of creditors — the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund — came to determine whether the Greek authorities have made sufficient progress with their economic overhauls to justify the release of the next installment of aid for the country.But before talks between the creditors and Greek officials began on Monday, news reports suggested that the lenders planned to release only part of the next installment of aid rather than the full 8.1 billion euros, or $10.6 billion, in order to keep pressure on Athens to deliver on its pledges.The I.M.F., which last month conceded that the troika made major missteps in Greece’s first bailout in 2010, might have to suspend loan payments to Greece if the authorities are unable to cover a funding shortfall. The organization’s rules dictate that governments must have at least 12 months of financing secured to receive bailout money.Although the I.M.F.’s admission of error had fueled hopes that the creditors would adopt a more lenient approach, the Greek media was dominated Monday by speculation that the government might be asked to impose further austerity measures despite a deepening recession and unemployment that has climbed to 27 percent.The reports cited a leaked document, purportedly sent by the troika to Greek officials, suggesting that the government might have to make fresh spending cuts if it fails to collect adequate tax revenue and close a funding shortfall of around 1 billion euros. The gap is attributed chiefly to the debts of the main health care provider, Eopyy. Neither the government nor troika officials would comment on the news reports.Prime Minister Antonis Samaras, who saw his government’s majority in the 300-seat Parliament shrink to just three members following the withdrawal of the junior partner in the coalition, the Democratic Left, has insisted that no more austerity will be imposed. In a speech to a congress of his conservative New Democracy party on Sunday, he emphasized the need for unity to ensure that the “unbelievable sacrifices” of the Greek people had not been in vain. Perhaps in response to Mr. Samaras’s appeal, two lawmakers who had left the party returned to its ranks on Monday, bringing the government’s majority in Parliament to 155.But delays in implementing an overhaul of the public sector, aggravated by the political crisis last month, have put Greece in a difficult bargaining position. Athens is set to miss a July 31 deadline to move 12,500 civil servants into a so-called mobility program for a year, during which time they will receive reduced wages before their status is reviewed. After a year, each worker will either be moved to another civil service job, if there is one available and they are qualified, or they will be laid off. The new administrative reform minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, a conservative regarded as the most pro-reformist member of the cabinet that was installed last week, plans to ask the troika for a two-month extension of the deadline.As for promised layoffs in the civil service, Greek officials are likely to point to the closure of the state broadcaster ERT last month as an indication of their commitment. But since the shutdown, which left about 2,700 people jobless, Mr. Samaras has offered to rehire 2,000 of the workers for a transitional broadcast service.Greek officials have also asked that the creditors agree to a reduction in the 23 percent value-added tax for restaurant meals as a way to help promote tourism. A record 17 million tourists are expected to visit Greece this year.Troika envoys are also planning to offer some relief to Greece, according to news reports citing the leaked document, with the lenders backing the implementation of tax breaks intended to attract sorely needed investment and some latitude to hire civil servants in crucial areas, like tax collection.The country’s lagging efforts to privatize state assets are also on the agenda. The sale of the state gambling company OPAP has run into problems, with the Czech-Greek consortium that was the sole bidder for a 33 percent stake in the operation demanding reassurance that OPAP’s contracts were legally sound. Last month, the Russian natural gas giant Gazprom declined to submit an expected bid for the Greek public gas corporation, Depa.Mr. Samaras has played down the setbacks, focusing instead on a decision by the developers of an Azeri natural gas field to build a pipeline to Europe that would cross Greece. The prime minister hailed the announcement on Friday as marking “the most significant positive economic development regarding our country of the past 10 years.”