LONDON — Vera Lengsfeld first realized the state was spying on her when cars started appearing outside her home. It was 1982, and cars were rare enough in Communist East Berlin to stand out — especially in groups of three.Soon, young men lingered in the staircase leading to her apartment. Her telephone was bugged. When Ms. Lengsfeld and her husband wanted to discuss something private, they took a walk.Except, as she learned after the wall had fallen and the files of the former secret police, the Stasi, were opened, her husband was one of 49 informers reporting on her. When it comes to privacy, Ms. Lengsfeld, 61, a writer and member of the Christian Democrats, knows exactly where she stands: “I have the greatest concern about secret services of any kind, even those in a democracy.”In a country that produced both the Gestapo and the Stasi, now global synonyms for secret police terror, the National Security Agency’s spying program has caused outrage, raising the question: Is this German exceptionalism as we know it, or is it a harbinger of how the mood in Europe might be shifting, of how America’s trust problem has taken on a new corrosive quality?The magazine Der Spiegel demanded asylum for the former N.S.A. contractor Edward J. Snowden on its cover, a call backed by 51 German politicians, intellectuals and business and union leaders. Now the government of Chancellor Angela Merkel is exploring how Mr. Snowden could testify before a parliamentary inquiry into the tapping of her cellphone and spying from the premises of the United States Embassy in Berlin.If Germany with its special history is on one end of the spectrum of reactions to American spying in Europe, Britain with its special relationship with the United States is on the other.Prime Minister David Cameron has dismissed critics’ views as “la-di-da” and “airy-fairy.” The Guardian, one of the first newspapers to publish Mr. Snowden’s material, was visited by a Cameron aide who insisted it physically destroy a computer with leaked material. When the head of MI5, the domestic intelligence agency, said those who published the material were handing a “gift to terrorists,” several papers ran sympathetic editorials.As major American allies in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, Britons feel more vulnerable to terrorism than most Europeans. The London attacks that killed 52 civilians on July 7, 2005, inevitably overshadow the security-liberty trade-off here. But that’s not the whole story. Unlike the United States and its Continental neighbors, Britain has no written constitution; it is a “society based on wrongs” rather than rights, making spying easier, suggests Alan Rusbridger, editor of The Guardian.Britain also never experienced a totalitarian police state. Indeed, its spies have long commanded a near-mythical respect. They cracked the Nazis’ Enigma code, earning them a special place in a country that draws much of its post-empire confidence from helping defeat Hitler. “Britons respect their secret services in a way many other countries don’t,” says the Oxford historian Timothy Garton Ash. He understands the differences between his country and Germany well: After living in East Berlin in the 1980s, he, too, learned that the Stasi had snooped on him.“The File,” a book he wrote about the experience, recounts how he tracked down the most senior officer on his case, Gen. Günther Kratsch, and asked why a recent graduate had warranted 325 pages of observations. General Kratsch told him he had been taught from the first day of spy school about the legendary British secret service. Whenever “an even halfway suspicious-looking Englishman” came along, they immediately started investigating.This respect may now be eroding by association with the N.S.A., at least abroad. Britain’s ambassador to Germany was summoned for a chat, showcasing the divisions on the Continent.The jury is still out on whether the rest of Europe will align itself with anger in the region’s No. 1 economy or with shoulder-shrugging in its bridge to America — and whether trans-Atlantic cooperation has been dealt a permanent blow.