JERUSALEM — Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced Tuesday night that Tzipi Livni, the former foreign minister who has long been a harsh critic of his handling of the Palestinian conflict, would join his next government, serving as justice minister and leading negotiations with the Palestinians.Ms. Livni’s new Hatnua Party is the first to sign an agreement with Mr. Netanyahu, who has been struggling for weeks to set up a coalition of at least 61 of the 120 Parliament members elected Jan. 22. The move came amid reports that talks with two larger factions — Yair Lapid’s centrist Yesh Atid and Naftali Bennett’s right-wing Jewish Home — had broken down, and analysts said it was an effort to put pressure on those parties to join the coalition quickly or risk being left out.“This is an agreement Netanyahu formulated as a sort of doomsday deal,” said Idan Kveller, Army Radio’s political reporter. “Even Livni’s great accomplishment still depends on whether Netanyahu forms a government. Otherwise this deal goes down the drain.”Giving Ms. Livni a role in the peace process could also be an attempt to placate Washington ahead of President Obama’s planned visit to Jerusalem next month. She campaigned largely on the Palestinian issue, and is among the Parliament’s strongest advocates for the creation of a Palestinian state as the only path to preserve Israel as a Jewish democracy.“This is an Israeli interest,” Ms. Livni told a conference of American Jewish leaders here last week. “It’s not a favor to the Palestinians, it’s not a favor to the Arab world, and it’s not a favor to the president of the United States.“There is no status quo,” she added. “Stagnation and stalemate means deterioration; this is something we cannot afford.”Ms. Livni would hardly be given a free hand. Any negotiating team would include Isaac Molho, who as Mr. Netanyahu’s special envoy has presided over four years of impasse in the peace talks. Any deal with the Palestinians would also have to be approved by the cabinet and the Parliament, and possibly a voter referendum.Ms. Livni, a 54-year-old lawyer, began her political life as a member of Mr. Netanyahu’s Likud Party, but broke away to help form the centrist Kadima faction in 2005. Under her leadership, Kadima won more Parliament seats than Likud in 2009, but she failed to form a coalition, handing Mr. Netanyahu the premiership. After several years of leading the opposition, she was ousted by Kadima voters in primary elections early last year, and quit politics, only to return several months later under the new banner of Hatnua, Hebrew for the Movement.At a news conference announcing the deal on Tuesday night, Mr. Netanyahu and Ms. Livni acknowledged their past disputes but said they paled next to the challenges Israel faced, including the Palestinian conflict, Iran’s nuclear program, Syria’s civil war and domestic issues including a sagging economy and the integration of ultra-Orthodox Jews into the military and workforce.“We must set aside our disagreements and join forces for the state of Israel,” Mr. Netanyahu said. “The state of Israel now needs a large national unity government. Today we’re making the first step towards this end.”Ms. Livni said that though she had “criticized the government’s action during the past four years,” she and Mr. Netanyahu had “sat down for many long and calm conversations” since the elections, and had “reached the conclusion that we must truly put all this behind.”Before Tuesday’s announcement, Ms. Livni repeatedly said Hatnua’s six lawmakers would not join Mr. Netanyahu’s government without other center-left parties. One likely candidate is Kadima, which has dwindled to two seats.That would give Mr. Netanyahu 39, including the 31 members of his own Likud-Beiteinu faction. The two ultra-Orthodox parties have 18, not enough to put him over the top. So he still needs either the Labor Party, which has rebuffed his entreaties in recent days, or the parties headed by Mr. Lapid and Mr. Bennett, whose united front is said to have angered Mr. Netanyahu.Mr. Lapid, who won 19 seats, and Mr. Bennett, with 12, were the darlings of the recent election, and both are eager to join the government, but on their own terms. The Livni deal suggests they may have overplayed their hands. Mr. Lapid’s platform centered on integrating the ultra-Orthodox, making a partnership with their parties problematic. Mr. Bennett also supports drafting the ultra-Orthodox into national service and opposes the creation of a Palestinian state, a direct contradiction with Ms. Livni’s stance.Neither leader reacted publicly to the Livni announcement Tuesday night.On Monday, Mr. Bennett told his Jewish Home faction there had been no “significant negotiations” for a week, according to Israeli news reports, while Mr. Lapid started a session with his Yesh Atid colleagues by joking, “It is the weekly meeting during which I report that nothing has happened.”