ASUNCIÓN, Paraguay — Horacio Cartes, a Paraguayan tobacco magnate, faced various challenges during his presidential bid. He was pressed to explain why antinarcotics police officers apprehended a plane carrying cocaine and marijuana on his ranch in 2000; why he went to prison in 1989 on currency fraud charges; and why he had never even voted in past general elections.Still, voters across the country seemed ready to give Mr. Cartes the benefit of the doubt, handing him a solid victory in Paraguay’s presidential election on Sunday. He took 46 percent of the vote against 37 percent for his main opponent, Efraín Alegre of the ruling Liberal Party, with about 80 percent of the voting stations reporting. Electoral authorities declared Mr. Cartes the winner.Mr. Cartes’s victory returns the presidency to the conservative Colorado Party — which held a tight grip on power for six decades, until 2008 — and opens a new phase of international scrutiny of Paraguay, the landlocked nation with a long reputation as a haven for smugglers.Paraguay’s governing institutions were already the focus of condemnation throughout Latin America in June 2012, after legislators here hastily ousted the president, Fernando Lugo, a former Roman Catholic bishop who had been elected amid hopes that he would diminish inequality in one of South America’s poorest countries.Less than a year after Mr. Lugo was removed from office in a Senate trial lasting just a few hours, Mr. Cartes, one of Paraguay’s richest men, drew upon the extensive political machine of the Colorado Party, which he joined in 2009.The race this year was marred by various claims of vote buying, including a video appearing to show a Colorado senator reaching a deal with Liberal Party operatives to buy votes for about $25 apiece in Caaguazú, an eastern department, or province. Still, many voters here shrugged off such accusations as somewhat par for the course in Paraguay.“We all make errors; nobody is perfect,” said Mario Gavilán, a carpenter, who voted for Mr. Cartes. “People are just jealous of his wealth. They want to dirty his name.”Mr. Cartes, through spokesmen, refused more than half a dozen requests here for an interview, and his campaign advisers tightly limited access to the candidate. But in some of his public statements after his foray into politics, he sought to defend himself against claims that he had been involved in an array of illicit activities.About his time in prison in 1989 for currency fraud, Mr. Cartes — who controls a web of companies, including a cigarette manufacturer, a bank, cattle ranches and a soft-drink bottler — told reporters that he had a “tranquil conscience” about a matter in which he was eventually cleared of wrongdoing by Paraguayan courts.As for the drug-trafficking claim, he contended in a tense television interview in March that the plane carrying the illegal cargo made an emergency landing on an airstrip at one of the ranches he owns. “I wouldn’t want to be president if I had ties to drug traffickers, and I also don’t plan to legalize anything,” he said.Responding to a host of other accusations against him, including money laundering and the smuggling of cigarettes into neighboring Brazil, Mr. Cartes said at a news conference on Sunday that the claims were attempts to smear him. “I was a victim,” he told reporters. “A lot of things are said in a campaign.”Across downtown Asunción on Sunday, low expectations about the race were evident in the colorful graffiti painted on dozens of buildings, including phrases like “Our dreams don’t fit in your ballot boxes.”At several polling stations, voters expressed dismay about having to choose between Mr. Cartes and Mr. Alegre, both of whom share ideologically similar conservative policies. During the campaign, Mr. Alegre had also been accused of irregularities while he served in the cabinet of Mr. Lugo.“I don’t have much confidence in the legitimacy of the elections,” said Luis Sacú, 33, who works for a real estate agent here. He said he had cast his vote for Mario Ferreiro, a leftist candidate. “The Colorado Party is so powerful and has so much money, and people are willing to sell their vote for just a few dollars.”Still, Mr. Cartes struck a chord with some voters, appealing to social conservatives and some in the hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church with disparaging comments comparing gay people to “monkeys” and saying theatrically that he would shoot himself in his own testicles if his son wanted to marry another man.While Paraguay’s economy is growing thanks to commodities exports, Mr. Cartes will face festering challenges, including glaring disparities in landholdings and income, scrutiny over his own business dealings and a resilient guerrilla organization, the Paraguayan People’s Army, which was involved in two attacks on security forces on Sunday in a remote region, leaving at least two people dead, a police officer and a member of the rebel group.Some voters, while expressing skepticism about Paraguay’s political system in general, were ready to support Mr. Cartes. “Nobody clean gets to the top in our failed democracy,” said Sebastián Soria, 30, the owner of a marketing company.Mr. Soria said he had voted for Mr. Cartes. “Every business he touches, he improves,” he said. “If he can bring just a little of that to government, the country will improve.”