FRANKFURT — The president of the European Central Bank on Thursday played down risks reverberating from his native Italy, evading questions about what policy makers might do if the country’s chaotic politics become a threat to euro zone stability.“That’s democracy,” Mario Draghi said at a news conference after the E.C.B. Governing Council left the bank’s benchmark interest rate at 0.75 percent.The Italian elections late last month failed to give any party a mandate to run the country. Market interest rates on Italian bonds have gone up only a little since the vote, Mr. Draghi pointed out. The subdued market reaction was a sign that bond investors were taking democracy Italian-style in stride, he said.“Markets were less impressed than politicians and you,” Mr. Draghi said to reporters at the news conference. Italy was just the “angst of the week,” he said.But he also offered reassurance that the E.C.B. would continue to keep interest rates low and allow banks to borrow as much money as they wanted at the benchmark interest rate. “Our monetary stance will remain accommodative as long as needed,” he said, reinforcing his vow from July to do whatever it took to preserve the euro zone, which marked a turning point in the crisis.The Bank of England, whose monetary policy committee also met on Thursday, likewise decided to keep its benchmark interest rate unchanged at a record low of 0.5 percent amid doubts about the strength of economic recovery in Britain.The British central bank maintained its program of economic stimulus at £375 billion, or about $560 billion. Some economists had expected the British central bank to expand its stimulus program to help keep the economy from falling back into recession, from which it emerged in the third quarter of last year.While most analysts had not expected the E.C.B. to act on rates this month, some argued that it should have.The Continent remains in recession, and unemployment is at a record high of nearly 12 percent. On Thursday the E.C.B.’s own economists issued slightly more pessimistic forecasts for this year and next, predicting that euro zone output would fall by 0.4 percent this year and rise 1 percent next year.With inflation well below the E.C.B. target of about 2 percent, some economists argued, there was plenty of space for a cut — especially when Italy is again raising concern about the integrity of the euro zone.“By the normal standards of central banking, a case for easier monetary conditions does not get better than this,” Carl Weinberg, chief economist of High Frequency Economics in Valhalla, New York, wrote in a note to clients before the rate announcement.The Italian elections failed to produce a candidate capable of forming a strong government. A quarter of the vote went to the anti-establishment party led by Beppe Grillo, a comedian, showing that voters were tired of austerity and no longer had faith in the political class.Fears that the euro zone would break up have eased since last year, when Mr. Draghi announced that the central bank was prepared to buy bonds of stricken countries in unlimited amounts to keep their borrowing costs under control.But before the E.C.B. would intervene in bond markets, governments would have to agree on measures to reduce debt and improve the performance of their economies. Italy would have difficulty meeting those conditions without an effective government.Mr. Draghi refused to specify how the E.C.B. might react if Italian bond yields rose to levels that threatened the government’s ability to service its debt, as happened last year. The E.C.B. plan to buy bonds as necessary is “an effective backstop,” he said.Perhaps drawing on his years of experience as a civil servant and a central banker dealing with ever-changing governments, Mr. Draghi said many of the steps taken by the outgoing technocratic government to reduce the Italian deficit would “continue on automatic pilot.”Mr. Draghi did, however, express concern about youth unemployment, which has reached astronomical levels in Spain and other countries and which he blamed on governments.“Unemployment is a tragedy; youth unemployment is an even greater tragedy,” Mr. Draghi said. He criticized European labor laws, which protect older workers and force young people to bear the brunt of a downturn. But he added, “There is very little the E.C.B. can do about that.”He gave no indication that the central bank would put more emphasis on jobs or other economic indicators in setting monetary policy, as the Bank of England and the U.S. Federal Reserve have been doing. The E.C.B.’s mandate requires it to focus primarily on inflation, but it is allowed to pursue economic growth as long as price stability is not threatened.Mr. Draghi said he saw no sign of deflation — a broad decline in prices that, by discouraging consumer spending and business investment, can be more economically destructive than runaway inflation.Asked whether rising stock prices signaled a bubble in asset prices, Mr. Draghi said it was too difficult to give a clear answer.The E.C.B.’s approach differs from that of the Bank of England, which has been trying to revive economic growth by keeping interest rates low and encouraging banks to lend more, even though inflation continued to hover above its target, also 2 percent.The pound has tumbled this year and fallen to its lowest level against the dollar in almost three years as some investors anticipated the central bank would inject more money into the ailing economy.Brian Hilliard, an economist at Société Générale in London, said more stimulus, or so-called quantitative easing, was just a matter of time. “If you’re worried about growth and not inflation, you’re going back to quantitative easing,” he said.But Mr. Hilliard also warned that allowing the pound to fall could be a risky strategy because it would ultimately push up the price of goods and services in Britain. Higher consumer prices could damage economic growth, he said.Mervyn A. King, the governor of the Bank of England, who is due to be replaced by Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of Canada, in about four months, was one of three monetary policy committee members who voted last month in favor of more economic stimulus. Mr. King has repeatedly said that more needs to be done to provide credit for businesses. The central bank’s current lending program suffered a setback when lending in Britain fell at the end of last year.Mr. Carney has been trying to dampen expectations in London that he would radically change the way the bank helps the economy. He previously suggested that he would continue to allow inflation to remain above the target while seeking to revive the economy.Signs of an economic recovery in Britain remain weak. Retail sales rose last month but manufacturing surprisingly shrank in February and activity in the construction sector also declined.Britain lost its Aaa credit rating last month from Moody’s Investors Service, which cited continuing weakness in the economy. The rating cut was widely expected but still offered ammunition to those critical of Prime Minister David Cameron’s austerity plan. The opposition Labour Party argued the debt downgrade was proof that the austerity measures went too far and were strangling growth.During his regular monthly news conference, Mr. Draghi also addressed the banking and debt crisis in Cyprus, whose government is negotiating a bailout from its European Union partners. “Cyprus is a small economy but the systemic risks may not be small,” he said. At the same time, he said, Cyprus needed to ensure that it was complying with money-laundering laws.Cyprus is seeking about €17 billion, or about $22 billion, to shore up government finances and its banks, which were badly exposed to a debt write-down in Greece. A number of prominent lawmakers in Germany and other euro zone states say they believe the island country, with its low taxes and lax bank regulation, is a hub of money laundering.Julia Werdigier reported from London. James Kanter contributed reporting from Brussels.