BEIRUT, Lebanon — As Syrian opposition leaders met in Turkey over the weekend to try to iron out their differences, Syria’s foreign minister invited rebels to join a national dialogue, promising that all those who lay down their arms and forswear foreign intervention will be part of a transitional government.“I tell the young men who carried arms to change and reform — take part in the dialogue for a new Syria and you will be a partner in building it,” the foreign minister, Walid al-Moallem, said in an interview broadcast on Syrian state television on Saturday. “Why carry arms?”The minister’s offer went a significant step beyond what President Bashar al-Assad proposed in a speech on Jan. 6, when he called for a national dialogue but intimated that those who had taken up arms would be excluded.To many of those fighting Mr. Assad, any suggestion of talks with a government they hold responsible for the civil war that has killed more than 60,000 people is absurd, even offensive. Even those in the opposition who reject the use of weapons refused to engage with Mr. Assad in the talks he proposed.Yet at least some in the Syrian government appear to be aiming to wrest the political initiative from Mr. Assad’s opponents, who remain divided — between exile leaders abroad and fighters on the ground, between secularists and Islamists, and between the armed and unarmed opposition. Meanwhile, those Syrians who are still on the fence increasingly worry about violence with no end in sight, and the world faces the specter of a failed state in a strategic area of the Middle East.Still, in a government that was never transparent and has become even murkier during the conflict of nearly two years, it was unclear whether Mr. Moallem spoke with full authority. Broadcasting the speech on state television appeared to give it more weight than other calls for dialogue offered by government figures like Vice President Farouk al-Shara, who proposed an inclusive dialogue in an interview with a Lebanese newspaper in December.Most rebels would probably be reluctant to trust any assurances that they could safely lay down arms from a government whose harsh crackdown on peaceful protesters set off the conflict in March 2011.The National Coalition of Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, the opposition exile group formed in November at the behest of Western and some Persian Gulf nations, has said that Mr. Assad’s ouster or resignation is a precondition for talks.The coalition met for a second day in Istanbul, but by Sunday evening there was no word of a consensus on the selection of a prime minister in waiting, with some members backing former Prime Minister Riad Hijab, the highest-ranking defector, and others arguing that he was too close to the government.The group was also expected to discuss what it considers to be the broken promises of the United States, the gulf countries and others, which had urged it to reorganize and expand its membership in return for the prospect of increased aid.A senior official from Iran, Mr. Assad’s only Middle Eastern ally, on Sunday offered one of the strongest recent defenses of the Syrian president, saying that there should be changes but that Mr. Assad should not be forced out.“We believe that there should be reforms emanating from the will of the Syrian people, but without resorting to violence” and American aid, Ali Akbar Velayati, a senior aide to Iran’s supreme leader, said in an interview with the Lebanese satellite television channel Al Mayadeen.In response to a question about whether the ouster of Mr. Assad was a “red line,” Mr. Velayati said: “Yes, it is so. But this does not mean that we ignore the Syrian people’s right” to choose their own rulers.France’s foreign minister announced that the Syrian opposition and its foreign allies would meet in Paris on Jan. 28 and reiterated calls for Mr. Assad to step down.“The situation is horrific, and Bashar must go as fast as possible,” Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius said in a radio interview, Reuters reported.Agence France-Presse reported that Mr. Assad’s mother, Anisa Makhlouf, was living in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, quoting Syrians living in the Emirates in a report that confirmed earlier rumors that she had left Syria with her daughter Bushra, whose husband, Assef Shawkat, was one of four senior security officials killed in a bombing in Damascus in July.Ayman Abdel Nour, a longtime critic of the Syrian government and the leader of a new group called Syrian Christians for Democracy, called Ms. Makhlouf’s departure an indication of “Assad losing support even from within his family,” the French news agency reported.