BANGKOK — President Thein Sein of Myanmar said Thursday that he was prepared to use force to quell the religious rioting that has shaken his country, answering calls even from longtime democracy advocates for more forceful security measures.“I am firmly committed to use the power to deploy the security forces vested in me by the Constitution,” Mr. Thein Sein said in a televised speech, his first public comments since anti-Muslim rioting in central Myanmar killed at least 40 people last week.Mr. Thein Sein said the use of force would be a “last resort to protect the lives and safeguard the property of the general public.”Five decades of military rule ended two years ago, easing repression in Myanmar, also known as Burma. But the reduction in social controls has led to an increase in sectarian and ethnic tensions. In western Myanmar over the past year, Buddhists have led attacks on a Muslim ethnic group, the Rohingya, and mosques and houses have been destroyed in a number of areas.But the violence in central Myanmar last week was the most ferocious. In the city of Meiktila, rioting started on March 20 after a dispute in a Muslim-owned gold shop. Buddhist mobs killed Muslims after pulling them from homes and schools, driving around 12,000 people into shelters.Mr. Thein Sein did not mention Buddhism or Islam in his remarks, but he noted that the country’s Constitution “guarantees the right of all citizens to worship freely any religion they choose.”He said he was “deeply saddened” by the killings but said the violence was part of the challenges the country faced as it rebuilt itself.“We must expect these conflicts and difficulties to arise during our period of democratic transition,” he said.As a measure of the deep concern over the rioting in the country, U Min Ko Naing, a former political prisoner who for years campaigned for an end to authoritarian rule, praised Mr. Thein Sein’s speech on Thursday and called for more forceful action by the security forces that were once his chief adversaries.“Security forces must not hesitate to stop those who kill and riot,” Mr. Min Ko Naing said by telephone. “The problem was that security forces failed to protect innocent people from mobs.”Mr. Thein Sein also appeared to be directing his comments at diplomats and potential foreign investors who have watched the rioting with alarm. As soon as the speech was given, a translation was posted to a Facebook page by Thant Myint-U, a historian who also serves as an adviser to the president.This week, the authorities have imposed curfews in five townships in the Bago region of central Myanmar after mobs burned down mosques, houses and shops. Bago borders Yangon, the country’s commercial capital. Troops have been sent in to maintain order in the troubled areas, and the president met for several hours with his closest aides and ministers on Wednesday to discuss how the government should respond.As in other regions, the rioters in Bago have included men dressed in the saffron robes of Buddhist monks. But one witness to the rioting in Bago, U Kyaw Naing Moe, said one of the monks had used large earth-moving equipment to destroy a mosque in the town of Okpho. It was puzzling, he said, that a monk would know how to operate what is relatively complex machinery.“We are now confused as to whether the monks are real monks or not,” Mr. Kyaw Naing Moe said. Some officials have said they fear the rioting has been orchestrated by unidentified groups.Details of the most recent attacks have been sparse, partly because the mobs continue to be hostile to journalists. Last week in Meiktila, a man in a monk’s robe held a blade to the neck of an Associated Press photographer and demanded that he hand over the memory chip from his camera.U Than Htut Aung, the head of Eleven Media, one of the country’s largest private news organizations, said journalists continued to be harassed by mobs in Bago. “The government needs to bring them to justice as soon as possible,” he said.