UNITED NATIONS  — Yemen has asked the United Nations Security Council to investigate a ship the Yemeni authorities said they had seized with a cargo of Iranian-made missiles, rockets and other weapons, the United Nations envoy to Yemen said Thursday.The Security Council’s members are discussing Yemen’s request, the envoy, Jamal Benomar, said Thursday after the Council’s consultations on Yemen’s political transition.Yemen’s Defense Ministry said Wednesday that the ship that the Yemeni authorities seized last month was carrying explosives, rockets, surface-to-air missiles, rocket-propelled grenades and large amounts of ammunition.President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi of Yemen sent a message to his Iranian counterpart, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, last week. In it, Mr. Hadi urged Mr. Ahmadinejad to stop sending arms to Yemen and to stop supporting a southern separatist movement, according to an official in the Yemeni president’s office, who spoke Thursday on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to brief the news media.Mr. Benomar would not say if the United Nations could confirm that the weapons were Iranian. He said it would be up to the United Nations investigation to determine “where the shipment came from, who the recipients were, etc.”Yemen has said recently that illegal arms shipments have made their way through the country’s porous borders. It is home to an active branch of Al Qaeda. The country has been struggling with a transition to democracy since protests a year ago forced Ali Abdullah Saleh to step down as president. Mr. Hadi leads a transitional government that is trying to promote reconciliation, draft a new constitution and hold elections.Mr. Saleh, who was allowed to stay in Yemen under a power-transfer deal, has been blamed by many for using loyalists and relatives in powerful posts to stall reform efforts.Britain’s United Nations ambassador, Mark Lyall Grant, and the Moroccan ambassador, Mohammed Loulichki, who led a recent Security Council mission to Yemen, said Mr. Hadi and other government officials had urged the Council to impose strong measures against anyone trying to undermine the political transition.The Security Council adopted a resolution in June that threatened nonmilitary sanctions against those trying to interfere with Yemen’s political transition.