NEW DELHI —  At a certain point this fall, the presidential elections in the Maldives stopped looking like the hiccups of a young democracy and veered into the realm of farce.Mohammed Nasheed was the leader after a first-round election back in September, but the country’s Supreme Court begged to differ. The court, which was allied with one of his rivals, voided the September election before it could reach a second round, citing irregularities in voter rolls.The court scuttled another vote planned for October, ordering the police to surround the election commission. In November, after Mr. Nasheed had trounced his rivals again, the court derailed a second-round vote with another last-minute delay.Something about it felt familiar. I had just arrived in South Asia after five years in the former Soviet Union, where I saw one leader after another dispensing with truly competitive politics.Elections kept happening, but there was only a glaze of competition; for the most part, the opposition candidates were docile, handpicked characters, because no one else was allowed to run. On the rare occasions when actual rivals were able to take part, as in recent elections in Ukraine and Georgia, the candidates who lost found themselves in court or in prison. The experiment in democracy, born in the euphoria of the 1990s, seemed to be ending.In South Asia, that experiment is much closer to its beginning.For many years, India and Sri Lanka were democracies surrounded by a grab bag of monarchies, dictatorships and military regimes. But then their neighbors began sliding into the democratic column, as if by force of gravity. In 2006, Bhutan’s king ordered an end to absolute monarchy. The same year, Nepal’s Maoist insurgents laid down their arms, restyling themselves as politicians. In 2008, Nepal’s monarchy was abolished, and the autocrat in the Maldives — Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, then Asia’s longest-serving leader — allowed a contested election and conceded defeat.The change was not, as in eastern Europe, encouraged and incentivized by the West. India has avoided promoting democracy to its neighbors, said Sumit Ganguly, a professor of political science at Indiana University. What influence India wields is subtle, he said, “a kind of grudging respect that India’s democratic institutions, however flawed, do seem to work, they seem to stagger on from one day to the next.”A cascade of elections is taking place this year and next, with six out of seven governments in South Asia — Sri Lanka is the exception — likely to change.Many of them have the white-knuckle feeling of an experiment: What happens when elections run into resistance from institutions that took shape over the course of decades? In the Maldives, it was the Supreme Court, which was allied with the former autocrat, Mr. Gayoom, and seemingly intent on ensuring victory by his younger half-brother, Yameen Abdul Gayoom. (The delays allowed Mr. Gayoom to secure the backing of the third candidate, and he won.)In Bangladesh, the announcement of an election date has set off spasms of violence, as the opposition demands a caretaker government to oversee the process.As South Asian institutions adjust, its new democracies will have to contend with “the sheer weight of the past,” Mr. Ganguly said. “It is going to be a form of ballast, that you are going to have to slowly jettison,” he said. But he rejected the notion that the shift to democracy could reverse itself. “People get a sense of excitement that they can kick out the rascals,” he said. “It’s very difficult to tell them they’re not going to be able to get rid of the next set of rascals.”So it was in Nepal last week. The elections were certainly messy: A bomb went off, vehicles were set on fire and hard-line Maoists called a transport strike to keep voters from returning to their home villages. The Maoists, who lost, alleged voter fraud and marched outside their headquarters shouting, “We are ready to fight!” But no one seemed to have an appetite for battle.By nightfall on Election Day, the snaking, jewel-colored lines at polling places spoke for themselves; 70 percent of eligible voters had taken part.Election officials had banned the use of unregistered vehicles for the day, so many voters walked for hours to get to the polls. Many roads were blocked by snow, so helicopters delivered the ballot boxes to mountainous precincts. At the end of it, Neel Kanthra Uprety, Nepal’s chief election commissioner, fairly glowed with relief.“It’s a grand success, if I may say so,” he said.