CAIRO —  Egypt entered a perilous 48 hours on Monday when the military delivered an ultimatum to the country’s first democratically elected president, hundreds of thousands of protesters renewed calls to oust him from office and the president’s Islamists allies vowed to take to the streets to stop what they called “a military coup.”In a military communiqué read over state television that echoed the announcement toppling former President Hosni Mubarak two chaotic years ago, the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces demanded Monday that President Mohamed Morsi satisfy the public’s demands within two days, or else the generals would impose their own “road map” out of the crisis.But instead of soothing the volatile standoff between Mr. Morsi’s opponents and his supporters, the generals seemed to add to the uncertainty that has paralyzed the state, decimated the economy and brought millions into the streets Sunday demanding the president step down. It was not clear what the military meant when it said Mr. Morsi must satisfy the public’s demands, what it might do if that vague standard was not met and who would be able to unite this badly fractured nation.The generals did, however, open a new confrontation with Mr. Morsi’s allies in the Muslim Brotherhood with its threat to impose a political “road map” on the president. Brotherhood members rallied in half a dozen cities to denounce the threat of a military takeover, a reminder that the group remains a potent force unwilling to give up the power it has waited 80 years to wield.“We understand it as a military coup,” one adviser to Mr. Morsi said, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss confidential negotiations. “What form that will take remains to be seen.”Mr. Morsi and the military’s top officer, Gen. Abdul-Fattah el-Sisi, entered a delicate negotiation on Monday, one fraught with risks for both men, and for the nation. Racked with fuel shortages, dwindling hard currency reserves and worries about its wheat supplies, Egypt urgently needs a government stable and credible enough to manage difficult and disruptive economic reforms. A move by the military to force the Brotherhood from power, despite its electoral victories, could set off an Islamist backlash in the streets that would make stability and economic growth even more elusive.President Obama called Mr. Morsi late Monday night, Mr. Morsi’s aides said. They described Mr. Obama’s message as a confirmation that the White House was continuing to deal with Mr. Morsi as Egypt’s elected president and to support the country’s transition to civilian democracy.Obama administration officials could not immediately be reached for comment about the call. Earlier Monday in Tanzania, Mr. Obama expressed concern about the protests in Egypt but said the situation was different from the earlier protests that had prompted the United States to call for the departure of Mr. Mubarak. “When I took a position that it was time for Egypt to transition, it was based on the fact that Egypt had not had democratic government for decades, if ever,” he saidNow that Egypt has such a government, he said, “there’s more work to be done to create the condition where everybody believes their voices are heard.” He urged both sides to refrain from violence, and specifically mentioned reports of assaults on women in Egypt, saying that “assaulting women does not qualify as peaceful protests.”In a sternly worded statement issued after 1 a.m. Tuesday, Mr. Morsi’s office said it was continuing with its plans for dialogue and reconciliation with its opponents. Noting that it was not consulted before the military made its statement, Mr. Morsi’s office asserted that “some of its phrases have connotations that may cause confusion in the complicated national scene” and suggested that it “deepens the division between the people” and “may threaten the social peace no matter what the motivation.”Earlier, speaking to a crowd of Islamists armed with makeshift clubs and hard hats at a rally in Cairo, a senior Brotherhood leader, Mohamed Beltagy, called on the crowd to defend Mr. Morsi’s “legitimacy” as the elected president. “No coup against legitimacy of any kind will pass except over our dead bodies,” he said, dismissing the latest protests as “remnants” of the Mubarak elite.At a late night rally for Mr. Morsi across the Nile in Giza, Mohamed Fadala, a financial manager, said that General Sisi appeared to have considered only the non-Islamist half of Egypt. “Sisi ignored half the people!”The generals have shown little enthusiasm for returning to politics, especially after their own prestige was badly tarnished by the year of street violence and economic catastrophe they oversaw after ousting Mr. Mubarak. But as the protests against Mr. Morsi grew larger than those that pushed out Mr. Mubarak, it became clear that Mr. Morsi had lost the support of much of the population and has never fully controlled the security services or other institutions of the state.Protesters faulted him and his Brotherhood allies for what they called a rush to monopolize political power. And in public squares that just a year ago echoed with chants demanding an end to military rule, cheers rose up again Monday welcoming the generals’ help in pressuring Mr. Morsi.Citing “the historic circumstance,” the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces said in its statement Monday that “if the demands of the people have not been met” within “48 hours” then the generals would “announce a road map” to be “enforced under the military’s supervision.” But the generals insisted that under its auspices “all political factions” would participate in settling the crisis.The “demands of the people” appeared to refer to the rallying cry of the wave of protests: a call for Mr. Morsi’s immediate departure. The generals, however, did not elaborate, leaving open the possibility that they might accept another power-sharing arrangement.“The wasting of more time will only create more division and conflict,” the statement warned.Still, the generals were also eager to disavow any eagerness to return to political power. “The armed forces will not be party to the circle of politics or ruling, and the military refuses to deviate from its assigned role in the original democratic vision,” the generals insisted.They had made a similar pledge when they took power two years ago, but as the Islamist pressure grew Monday night the generals issued a second statement specifically denying that they planned a “military coup.”“The conviction and culture of the Egyptian armed forces doesn’t allow following the policy of ‘military coups,’ ” the statement declared, though a military coup brought Col. Gamal Abdel Nasser to power 60 years ago. “The armed forces’ statement was intended to push all political parties in the nation to find solutions to the current crisis quickly.”The Interior Ministry, whose police officers have been in open revolt against Mr. Morsi, issued its own statement endorsing the military’s intervention — another reminder of the breakdown in authority over the holdover institutions of the Mubarak government.Egypt had been bracing for weeks for Sunday’s protests against Mr. Morsi on the anniversary of his inauguration. But the turnout surprised almost everyone: the crowds were far larger — running into the millions — and less violent than expected. The result not only underscored the depth of the animosity against Mr. Morsi but also dispelled Brotherhood arguments that a conspiracy of Mubarak “remnants” accounted for most of the opposition in the streets.By Monday morning, however, clashes between Brotherhood supporters and opponents had left 15 dead across the country. Protesters attacked several Brotherhood offices. And in Cairo a mob attacked the Brotherhood’s headquarters with Molotov cocktails, setting it on fire, breaking down its doors and looting the building.A few Brotherhood members trapped inside the darkened building tried to hold off the attackers by firing blasts of birdshot, and after midnight other gunmen evidently arrived as well. The Health Ministry reported eight deaths outside the building, all but one from gunshots.Protest organizers had given Mr. Morsi until Tuesday to resign and threatened a general strike. Protesters chained or blockaded government offices in 11 provinces. By late afternoon, four cabinet ministers had resigned. By evening, the crowds in several cities had grown to the hundreds of thousands again.Many of the demonstrators now calling for Mr. Morsi’s ouster had spent months last year marching to demand that the military give up its hold on power.But when the military’s announcement was broadcast over the radio on Monday, cheers erupted.Hassan Ismail, a local organizer, rejected any compromise that left Mr. Morsi in office and at the same time sought to distance his movement from its new military allies. “We don’t want to be against the army,” Mr. Ismail said. “And we don’t want the army to be against us.”Some liberals say they saw hope in what they characterized as the public’s consistent rejection of any return to authoritarianism, from the generals or the Brotherhood. “The people have imposed a balance of weakness between the military and authoritarian Islamists,” argued Hossam Bahgat, founder of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, “and this could be good in the long run, provided the fight for democracy continues.”