MUNICH — The trial of the surviving member of a neo-Nazi group accused of a string of anti-immigrant killings opened Monday in a Munich court amid a debate about racism in German society and the country’s security services.Beate Zschäpe, 38, is charged with killing eight men of Turkish descent, a man of Greek descent and a policewoman, and with carrying out two bombings and belonging to a terrorist group. She will be tried with four men who are charged with supporting the three-member group, which called itself the National Socialist Underground, or N.S.U., a play on the name for Hitler’s National Socialist Party, better known as the Nazis.The case has shaken the country’s security services and confronted Germans with uncomfortable questions about prejudice against the immigrants who make up an increasingly large part of society.The trial, which is expected to last more than a year, will be closely watched by the three million Turks and other immigrants who call Germany home. Many of the country’s partners abroad are also following it as a test of the Germans’ ability to come to terms with their modern multicultural identity.Mehmet Daimagüler, a lawyer representing several of the victims’ survivors, who are allowed to take part in the trial as co-plaintiffs, compared its political importance beyond the courtroom with the Allies’ prosecution of Nazis in 1945 and 1946 in the occupied German city of Nuremberg.Six of the killings occurred between 2000 and 2006 and were initially known as the “döner murders,” a reference to the Turkish kebabs sold in stands across Germany, a tag that some found to be demeaning. The policewoman was killed in 2007.For years, investigators suspected the killings were connected to organized crime. Only after two members of the neo-Nazi organization, Uwe Mundlos and Uwe Böhnhardt, killed themselves as police officers closed in on them after a bank robbery in 2011 did evidence — including video that spliced together bloody photographs of the victims taken at the crime scenes — emerge that led the authorities to focus on far-right hate groups.On Monday, moments after the trial’s opening formalities, the presiding judge, Manfred Götzl, called a recess after Ms. Zschäpe’s lawyers challenged his neutrality on the grounds that he required her lawyers to go through security, arguing it was “open discrimination” against the defense.Ms. Zschäpe stood with her arms crossed and her back to the courtroom for 20 minutes, nibbling mints offered by her lawyers. The four others facing charges of supporting the group partially covered their faces as they entered the packed courtroom.Would-be spectators trying to secure the 50 seats in the observation gallery began lining up outside the court four hours before the trial began. They included several lawmakers from Turkey.Osman Can, a leader of Turkey’s governing party who was among the observers, called the trial a “question of humanity.”“The violent methods that are seen in this case are not only aimed at Turks,” Mr. Can said. “They are against Jews or Roma, or any viewed as ‘others’ in German society.”Ms. Zschäpe has not spoken to the authorities since November 2011, when she walked into a police station and told officers, “I’m the one you are looking for.” She denies the charges, but faces a sentence of life in prison if convicted.The case has attracted widespread attention abroad. Its opening was delayed by nearly three weeks after a Turkish newspaper filed a petition with Germany’s highest court to be allowed in the courtroom after it failed to secure one of the 50 seats reserved for reporters. The high court ordered the Munich judges to grant access to news media outlets from Turkey and Greece, leading to a new accreditation process.That delay was only the latest in a case that has been plagued by mistakes that have damaged the reputation of Germany’s security apparatus. The head of the domestic intelligence agency resigned in July because an official in his office had shredded documents that may have contained evidence from paid informants about members of the group.State domestic intelligence chiefs in Thuringia, Saxony and Saxony-Anhalt also stepped down as a result of the case, and critics and relatives of the victims charge that the government indirectly supported the neo-Nazis through payments to confidential informants associated with the far right, several of whom had connections to the group over the years.A parliamentary committee that convened in January has been asked to investigate possible wrongdoing by the authorities. The committee is expected to issue a final report in the summer.Eva Högel, a lawmaker for the opposition Social Democratic Party who sits on the committee, said testimony from dozens of witnesses had so far revealed no concrete evidence that the security authorities were complicit in the crimes.“What we have found are two things, a widespread downplaying of far-right extremism by authorities, that rightist extremism was not seen as a danger for our democracy,” Ms. Högel said last month on W.D.R. public television. “We have no evidence of that. But their attitude toward the victims is questionable. We found that.”Lawyers representing the 77 co-plaintiffs, all relatives of the victims, said that justice involved much more than a harsh sentence for Ms. Zschäpe. The relatives say they want answers to questions about how their husbands, fathers or brothers were targeted.They also want details about the role played by German security officials.“The idea that the N.S.U. only consisted of three very dangerous far-right extremists is very difficult to imagine,” Sebastian Scharmer, one of the lawyers, said on Sunday.In addition to the shootings, prosecutors say that the group was behind two bombings in Cologne, Germany, one in January 2001 and the other in June 2004 that were intended to kill “as many people as possible only because of their non-German origin.” Twenty-three people were wounded in the attacks, but no one was killed.Ms. Zschäpe is not accused of direct involvement in the murders, but prosecutors stated in the indictment that all of the group’s decisions were made jointly, underlining her role as an equal to the two men, who killed themselves. Her lawyer has said she will not testify at the trial.