UNIVERSITY PARK, Tex. — More than four years after leaving office, former President George W. Bush has a question for America: So what would you have done?In a new brick-and-limestone museum, visitors to an interactive theater will be presented with the stark choices that confronted the nation’s 43rd president: invade Iraq or leave Saddam Hussein in power? Deploy federal troops after Hurricane Katrina or rely on local forces? Bail out Wall Street or let the banks fail?The hypothetical exercise, which includes touch screens that let users watch videos of “advisers” before voting on whether they would make the same choices that Mr. Bush did, revisits the most consequential moments of his administration. In the process, the country is being asked to re-evaluate the two-term president who presided over some of the most tumultuous years in the nation’s history.The George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum will be officially dedicated on Thursday on the campus of Southern Methodist University in a ceremony that will bring together President Obama and the four living ex-presidents. Leaving aside for a day the partisan rancor that marked Mr. Bush’s tenure, they will help celebrate his eight years as president and six as governor of Texas.The $250 million complex houses the 13th official presidential library, and the third in Texas, but it is the first of the iPad era. The exhibits are filled with modern gadgetry and 25 different films and interactive videos. Many of the artifacts of the period are on display — a butterfly ballot from Palm Beach County, Fla., a replica of Mr. Bush’s Oval Office, the bullhorn he used at ground zero and a gnarled steel beam from the World Trade Center demolished on Sept. 11, 2001.The museum’s 14,000 square feet of exhibits present the presidency Mr. Bush intended (tax cuts, No Child Left Behind, faith-based social services) juxtaposed against the presidency he ended up having (terrorism, war and financial crisis). Large screens recall the day the towers fell in New York and the invasion of Iraq. A glass-topped Defending Freedom Table allows visitors to pull up briefing materials, videos and maps as if on a giant tablet.No president produces a museum known for self-flagellation, and Mr. Bush’s is no exception. It does not ignore controversies like the weapons of mass destruction that were never found in Iraq, but it does not dwell on them either. In the Iraq display it says flatly, “No stockpiles of W.M.D. were found.” But then it adds, “Post-invasion inspections confirmed that Saddam Hussein had the capacity to resume production of W.M.D.”A six-minute introductory video narrated by former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice acknowledges disputes over Iraq and interrogation techniques while defending them as efforts to protect the country. “If you were in a position of authority on Sept. 11,” she says, “every day after was Sept. 12.”The museum touches on other crises and setbacks as well, including exhibits on Hurricane Katrina and the president’s failed Social Security initiative. But it also features often-overlooked achievements, like the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, which has treated millions of people with AIDS in Africa, and the creation of the world’s largest marine preserve.“The museum itself is the Bushes’ personal statement about what they think was important,” said Mark Langdale, president of the George W. Bush Foundation, who oversaw the construction. But Brendan Miniter, who managed development of the museum, said that Mr. Bush wanted the exhibits to avoid editorializing and, for example, insisted that critical letters from troops be included. “We try to let it speak for itself,” Mr. Miniter said.Mark K. Updegrove, director of the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library, said the tone should come as no surprise. “It’s unfair for us to assume that an exhibit depicting a president’s administration will be objective when the president is alive,” said Mr. Updegrove, who is working on a book on the father-and-son Bush presidents. “But there’s still great value in getting a president’s perspective on his administration.”An intriguing aspect of the museum is who is featured and who is not. There is a statue of Mr. Bush with his father, a section devoted to Laura Bush’s travels, a video by his daughters and even statues of the family dogs and cat. In addition to Ms. Rice, Mr. Bush’s two chiefs of staff, Andrew H. Card Jr. and Joshua B. Bolten, also narrate videos. But former Vice President Dick Cheney, former Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and Karl Rove, the president’s political strategist, generally make only cameo appearances in news footage.More than $500 million was raised for the George W. Bush Presidential Center and associated programs. The library and museum will be turned over to the National Archives and Records Administration, while the former president will retain control of a public policy institute that promotes his priorities.Set on 23 acres of the S.M.U. campus, the expansive complex designed by Robert A. M. Stern Architects fits the university’s Georgian architectural style. Its conservation elements, including rooftop solar panels, rainwater harvesting and efficient building systems, earned it LEED (for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Platinum certification, the highest rating by the United States Green Building Council.A 15-acre park landscaped by Michael Van Valkenburgh Associates features native Blackland Prairie grasses, habitats for butterflies and birds and tree-shaded lawns. A 67-foot tower called Freedom Hall will be lighted at night against the Dallas skyline. Inside visitors will encounter a giant 360-degree high-definition video wall showing scenes from Texas.The institute is “a cross between a think tank and an N.G.O.,” or nongovernment organization, according to James K. Glassman, its founding executive director. It concentrates on six areas: economic growth, democracy promotion, education reform, global health, military service and women’s rights.“These are the things the president has been passionate about,” Mr. Glassman said. “Some of these things he was able to get done while he was governor and while he was president, and some of these things will take a long time to get done.”Much like Bill Clinton, Mr. Bush uses his influence to convene public and private resources behind his initiatives. The institute’s Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon project, for instance, builds on the AIDS relief initiative by fighting cervical cancer in Africa. In partnership with the federal government, the United Nations, Susan G. Komen for the Cure and drug companies, the institute is organizing vaccinations, homemade diagnoses and early treatment programs in places like Zambia and Botswana.Such efforts may enhance the reputation of a president who left office with historically low approval ratings, but he denied that was his goal. “I don’t view the post-presidency as burnishing any legacy,” Mr. Bush said in an interview with Mr. Updegrove in Parade Magazine. “I view it as living life to the fullest. The challenge when you’re a former president is how do you use your God-given talents? People will tell you that you deserve to rest. Well, you never deserve to rest.”As president, he rarely had a chance to rest given the endless cascade of crises as visitors will experience in the Decision Points Theater. As many as 24 visitors at a time are presented with one of four situations — the invasion of Iraq, the troop buildup in 2007, Hurricane Katrina or the financial crisis. Visitors have four minutes to pull up videos of actors playing White House aides, generals, lawmakers and others giving advice, then they pick one of three options.When the room has voted, either Mr. Card or Mr. Bolten appears on the main screen to announce the result. Then Mr. Bush appears to describe what he did.Mr. Bush’s advisers said the idea was to let Americans see the choices as he did. “We fully anticipate that some people will try to poke holes or some people will debate,” said Mr. Langdale. “That’s fine. That’s part of history.”