WITHIN a month of taking over as editor of The Hatchet, George Washington University’s student newspaper, Cory Weinberg knew that something had to change. Advertising dollars had been steadily declining. Printing costs continued to rise. At the same time, visits to the website were up. The number of students reading articles on their mobile devices had doubled. Traffic from Twitter had increased 300 percent in the last year.In June, he and the general manager outlined a plan for the paper’s board of directors to eliminate one of two weekly editions and invest more heavily in online coverage and ways to reach students through mobile and social media. At first, Mr. Weinberg worried that the board, made up mostly of Hatchet alumni, journalism professionals and professors, would balk.“There’s been tension elsewhere over cutting editions,” said Mr. Weinberg, a senior majoring in economics and journalism. “And, honestly, I expected some resistance, especially when you are talking about changing an organization that people love. But they got it.” The board’s decision was unanimous.Becoming a weekly is just one of the efforts to help ensure the future of this 109-year-old newspaper. The Hatchet, which is independent of G.W.U., pays $4,520 in monthly rent to the university. And so an alumni group called Home for The Hatchet bought it a townhouse.To bolster its $2 million fund-raising drive, the group is offering “naming opportunities.” Donors have pledged $50,000 each for engraved plaques outside the offices of the editor in chief and business manager. The newsroom will be sponsored for $50,000 by Berl Brechner, a longtime television executive and 1967 Hatchet editor in chief, who fondly remembers covering the tumult of the Vietnam protests there.Naming opportunities are still available for the sports and opinion offices and staff lounge. The entire building can be had for a $750,000 pledge. •THE HATCHET, like many college newspapers with long traditions, has until recently managed to stave off industry challenges that have forced professional news organizations to make deep budget cuts. When print advertising revenue fell 9 percent for commercial newspapers in 2007, college newspapers enjoyed a 15 percent increase. But the student media landscape has been shaken in the last two years by plummeting revenues and changing reading patterns.“In the last year in particular, we have seen a contraction in the marketplace,” said Tammy Nelson, vice president for marketing and research for the marketing company re:fuel. “The measures a lot of college newspapers took in recent years, maybe cutting editions from five days a week to four days a week, trimming sections now and then, got them through the downturn. But they are having to look at other ways now to be profitable.”At the University of Texas, Austin, The Daily Texan has been relying on a reserve fund to help make up a free fall in ad revenue from $2.2 million in 2007 to $1.3 million last year, according to Friends of The Daily Texan, an alumni group organized to help the paper that counted Walter Cronkite and Bill Moyers on its staff.At the University of California, Berkeley, the 142-year-old Daily Californian is in the midst of an ambitious fund-raising campaign after a single anonymous donor who had been helping fill growing budget gaps pulled out this summer.Former staff members have helped The Daily Illini, the student-run newspaper at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, begin to pay down its $250,000 debt. Roger Ebert, the late film critic and D.I. editor in chief, had appealed to fellow newspaper alumni in a widely circulated letter on Facebook that helped drive donations. “Many, including myself, would say that they owe their careers at least in part to their experience at Illini Media,” he wrote. “It’s now time to give back.”The Daily Illini is among several financially independent campus news organizations that have asked students to support small fee increases. Beginning this semester, Illinois students pay a media fee of $1.85, which is expected to cover 9 percent of this year’s budget. A $3 fee was approved last April at the University of California, Irvine. The student body at Western Michigan University initiated and voted for a $10 annual fee to support the newspaper as well as radio and broadcast station. Students at the University of Connecticut balked at a $6 increase for its student newspaper, but noting that voter turnout on the issue was small, the trustees approved the fee for this academic year, putting off the debate for another year.The University of Georgia’s Red and Black and the University of Virginia’s Cavalier Daily have recently cut back the number of days they publish print editions.Ms. Nelson warns that college papers that eliminate too many of their print editions do so at their peril. Re:fuel research shows that students still enjoy picking up copies, free and convenient as they are, stacked in the student union and dorm lounges. In 2011, 60 percent of students read their college paper — a testament, if you will, to its importance as an outlet for student concerns, from tuition increases to the quality of food in the cafeteria. Of those readers, 60 percent preferred print, while 16 percent preferred to get their college news online.That disparity may be because many student papers have heretofore simply posted their print articles online. Now, faced with harsh economic realities — and the need to train young journalists in multimedia storytelling — student publications have begun to beef up their digital coverage, attracting a new audience in the process.“Student media seems to be finally getting with the program,” said Daniel R. Reimold, a college media scholar and professor of journalism at St. Joseph’s University in Philadelphia. “A lot of innovation is happening right now. There are finally significant attempts to re-brand online and, in a few cases, on mobile.” Mr. Reimold, whose blog, College Media Matters, chronicles developments on the scene, cites the transformation of The Oregon Daily Emerald at the University of Oregon. “After 112 years as The Daily Emerald, they saw the tidal wave of change,” he said. “They re-branded themselves from a daily student newspaper into a multiplatform student media company.”It was not financial worries alone that prompted Ryan Frank, its publisher, to announce the decision in 2012 to print two instead of five days a week, and to develop a more robust online, mobile and social media presence.In an open letter to campus, Mr. Frank pointed to Pew Research Center studies showing overall print newspaper readership declines among 18- to 24-year-olds. He also said that focusing on digital journalism would help the staff gain relevant experience for their job searches. “This is about delivering on our mission to serve our community and prepare our student staff for the professional world,” he said.The idea of dropping the five-day-a-week tradition made some student staff members nervous, he acknowledged: “Though they had literally grown up on Facebook, ink still coursed through their veins. They liked the tradition. But the more we looked at the facts, the more students started to see the benefits of a major change.”Mr. Reimold is also closely watching George Mason University’s Fourth Estate, a new campus news organization. This fall, the university’s 52-year-old student paper, Broadside, merged with Connect2Mason, a digital journalism site. “I think this is the perfect example that change can be achieved,” he said. “I hope they will serve as a role model for the future of student media.”In 2008, frustrated that the paper was slow to embrace digital media, former Broadside editors on the Fairfax, Va., campus had created Connect2Mason, which carried news as well as serving as a digital hub of student publications and radio broadcasts. It was among a handful of ambitious student journalism start-ups, including Penn State’s Onward State, which drew national attention for its coverage of the scandal that led to the ouster of the football coach Joe Paterno.When Frank Muraca, a junior majoring in economics, took over as executive editor of Connect2Mason last spring, there were 48 staff members publishing content online daily. At Broadside, 12 regular staff members and more than 100 student contributors produced a weekly mix of news, features, reviews and in-depth reporting on issues; that content was also posted online.Staff members regularly bumped into one another on stories and worked side by side in a warren of cubicles inside the Student Media Center, but they rarely collaborated. “Born out of a conflict, there was always competition between the two,” said Colleen Wilson, who joined Broadside as a sophomore and became editor in chief earlier this year. “They had their meetings. We had our meetings.”Then, at a journalism conference last April in Norfolk, Va., Ms. Wilson and Mr. Muraca began talking about integrating operations. “And the more we really started talking about it, the more it made sense,” Mr. Muraca said. “Each organization had its strengths. It didn’t make sense to have these two separate organizations fighting over resources and story topics when we were both trying to achieve the same goal of informing the Mason community.”Over the summer, they worked on a new organizational structure, with the two as co-editors. The Office of Student Media supported the idea and helped with administrative details. (Broadside and Connect2Mason received university funds though maintained editorial independence.) Ms. Wilson and Mr. Muraca also redesigned the newspaper so that it would read more like a magazine, and the website. For the first time this September, students did not have to choose between working for print or for digital media.Ms. Wilson and Mr. Muraca also wanted a name change so that neither organization would feel absorbed by the other. They embraced Fourth Estate, given its historical reference to the important role a free press plays in a democracy, as the fourth seat in the system of governmental checks and balances. Their new media organization would serve the same role on campus.“We thought that was really great and had a special tie to George Mason, the author of the Virginia Declaration of Rights,” Mr. Muraca said. It was Mason who wrote in 1776: “Freedom of the press is one of the great bulwarks of liberty.” 