
JOHANNESBURG — The man who provided incomprehensible sign language interpretation during Nelson Mandela’s memorial service last week was part of a mob that burned two men to death in 2003, according to news reports that quoted the interpreter, some of his friends and a relative.        
The man, Thamsanqa Jantjie, was quoted in The Sunday Times of Johannesburg as saying, “It was a community thing, what you call mob justice, and I was also there.”        
The Associated Press reported on Monday that one of Mr. Jantjie’s relatives and three friends said he was part of a group that attacked and killed two men who had stolen a television. Mr. Jantjie did not go to trial because he was found mentally unfit, the friends and relative told The A.P.        
Reached by telephone on Monday, however, Mr. Jantjie denied the reports of his murder charges, saying, “It is nonsense.”        
The tale of Mr. Jantjie, which has grown increasingly bizarre since advocates for the deaf criticized his signing at the memorial as gibberish, has been deeply embarrassing for the government, which was working to give Mr. Mandela, the father of the country’s democracy, a pitch-perfect send-off. Mr. Mandela was buried on Sunday in his home village of Qunu after an eloquent and emotional ceremony.        
But the questions surrounding Mr. Jantjie continue to nag officials here. First, the government was forced to admit that the interpreter, whom it had hired at a discount rate from a company that it said later “vanished into thin air,” was not a professional, a euphemism in the eyes of sign language experts who said his meaningless gesticulations made a mockery of sign language.        
Now, the government is facing reports that the interpreter has faced serious criminal charges in the past, including murder and rape, leaving it in the difficult position of trying to explain how a man who was such a potential security risk could have been allowed to stand on a podium next to some of the world’s most important leaders, including President Obama.        
A spokesman for the National Prosecuting Authority referred questions to the government. The chief government spokeswoman, Phumla Williams, did not return a call and an email seeking comment.        
Mr. Jantjie told several news agencies last week that he was schizophrenic and had hallucinated while onstage at the memorial, seeing angels descending into the Soweto stadium where the event was held.        