FRANKFURT — Businesspeople around the world are generally a pro-American lot. But there is rising concern among them that, even if the White House and Congress find a way out of their debt-ceiling impasse in the coming hours or days, the world economy may suffer damage that may not be so easy to reverse.The prospect of similar deadlocks in the future has raised questions about the ability of Washington to function and remain a source of stability in the world, according to some European executives, who worry there could be lasting damage to consumer and business confidence that could act as a brake on investment and spending.“This is a critical situation,” said Mario Moretti Polegato, founder of the Italian shoemaker Geox, which is trying to build up its relatively small presence in the United States. “It could be really, really bad for business in general and for my business.”As an Italian, Mr. Polegato knows a thing or two about political dysfunction. But the deadlock in Washington is even more alarming than the chronic instability in Rome, he said, because the United States is so much more important to world affairs.“America represents democracy and stability. America is America!” Mr. Polegato said by telephone from the Geox headquarters in Biadene di Montebelluna. “And now there are questions about America.”Some of the damage from the Washington stalemate is immediate and concrete. The American Chamber of Commerce in Germany expressed concern Monday that the U.S. government shutdown had already delayed negotiations on a trans-Atlantic trade agreement. Businesses on both sides of the ocean see the agreement as a way to stimulate growth and job creation.Europe’s own fragile recovery rests on demand for its exports, especially from the United States, the largest customer for German products outside the European Union. The United States is also by far the largest export market for the Union as a whole, buying goods worth 143 billion euros, or $193 billion, in the first six months of 2013. That was double the value of European exports to China.It would not take much of a stutter in U.S. growth to undermine the euro zone economy, which is still burdened by weak banks and 12 percent unemployment. In fact, exports to the United States were down 2 percent through June compared with the period a year earlier.Bernhard Mattes, a Ford executive who is president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Germany, said members of the group were not yet feeling a direct impact on sales. But he added, “We are hearing concern from our member companies about the development in the U.S. and worry about consumer confidence.”Other chamber members worry that public works projects in the United States could be delayed by the government shutdown, Mr. Mattes said in an interview Tuesday. That could be bad for German companies like Hochtief, a German builder, or Liebherr, a supplier of construction equipment. A Hochtief spokesman said, however, that so far none of its U.S. business had suffered.There was palpable relief in European stock markets Tuesday as Senate leaders neared completion of a deal that would raise the debt ceiling and reopen the federal government. But with the U.S. House of Representatives still showing no signs of buying in, European investors might have been thinking wishfully.And there remained anxiety abroad that any agreement would be a stopgap, leading to another round of brinkmanship in a few months.“We would very much appreciate not only a short-term solution,” Mr. Mattes said, “but also a long-term framework for strong investment and trade between the European Union and the U.S.”Euro zone businesspeople also worry that further turmoil in Washington would push down the value of the dollar against the euro. A weaker dollar makes European products more expensive not only in the United States but also in countries like China whose currencies tend to move in concert with the dollar.On Tuesday, the dollar rose sharply against the euro, evidently on optimism about Senate developments. But some analysts expressed concern that a deal, even if it came before the Thursday deadline for a nominal default on United States Treasury debt, would already be too late to prevent the Treasury from missing payments on government bonds coming due. A default, even if short-lived, would have consequences abroad that are impossible to calculate but clearly frightening.United States Treasury bonds are the most widely held securities in the world and are used as collateral in countless financial transactions. China and Japan are the two biggest holders of U.S. government bonds by far, with about $1.3 trillion and $1.1 trillion.But many other countries are also heavily exposed to U.S. bonds, including Brazil, Taiwan, Belgium and Switzerland. Any default would probably be temporary, Rob Carnell, chief international economist at ING Bank, said in a note to clients Tuesday. But he added, “a prolonged default really would start to damage faith in the U.S. Treasury markets.”Investors would shift their money to other assets considered low risk, Mr. Carnell said, like gold or currencies like the Swiss franc.A migration away from Treasury bonds would ultimately be costly for American taxpayers. The use of United States debt as a kind of international wampum makes it possible for Washington to borrow more cheaply than it would otherwise. A study published by the Federal Reserve last year found that a monthly reduction of $100 billion in foreign purchases of United States bonds would raise the interest rate on five-year debt by 0.4 percent to 0.6 percent.Interest rates in some of the more debt-stressed European countries like Italy would probably also rise, making it even harder for companies and individuals to get loans and prolonging the economic downturn there. Italian and Spanish bond yields both rose slightly on Tuesday, though they remained below levels considered dangerous to government fiscal health.For people outside the United States, though, the biggest damage from the political impasse in Washington may be to their morale. If the government of the world’s most powerful nation cannot keep operating, what can you believe in anymore?Carl Weinberg, chief economist of High Frequency Economics in Valhalla, New York, noted that the United States had suffered other blows to its prestige recently, including revelations of Internet spying by the National Security Agency and indecisiveness in dealing with chemical weapons in Syria. China has stepped into the vacuum, taking advantage of President Barack Obama’s absence from world affairs to forge new trade deal in Asia, Mr. Weinberg wrote in a note to clients Tuesday.“And now we have this debt limit stupidity,” he said.