SYDNEY, Australia —  Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, who emerged triumphantly from the political wilderness to regain Australia’s leadership this year, is battling widespread predictions of a defeat in federal elections on Saturday that would bring an end to his party’s tumultuous six years in power.The contest pits Mr. Rudd, of the Labor Party, against Tony Abbott, the leader of the conservative opposition Liberal-National coalition. Mr. Rudd, who served as prime minister from 2007 to 2010, returned to the leadership in June after a nearly two-year campaign by his supporters culminated in a party coup that dispatched the country’s first female prime minister, Julia Gillard.But the Labor Party, which dumped Ms. Gillard in the hopes of averting a landslide loss that would devastate its ranks in Parliament, has struggled to shake an image that it is more focused on personal feuds than on pressing issues like the slowing of Australia’s mining-driven economy and the record number of asylum seekers trying to reach the country in dangerous and overcrowded boats.Although Mr. Rudd’s return led to a bounce in support for Labor, which has led a minority government since its poor showing in the last federal elections in 2010, polls indicate that surge has now evaporated. And in a remarkable reversal for Mr. Rudd, a man once considered Australia’s most popular politician, analysts say the question is not whether the Labor Party will lose, but by how much, and whether he may be among the casualties; Mr. Rudd is facing a tough fight for his own seat in Parliament.In a survey released on Monday by Newspoll, based on polling from Aug. 30 to Sept. 1 among about 1,110 voters, Mr. Abbott was shown for the first time to have overtaken Mr. Rudd as the nation’s preferred prime minister by 43 percent to 41 percent, although the difference between them is within the poll’s margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.The same poll showed Labor trailing the opposition coalition 54 percent to 46 percent. That result would prove disastrous for Mr. Rudd and deliver a resounding majority in Parliament for Mr. Abbott.“Maybe our Lord will materialize and touch the forehead of Kevin Rudd and anoint him his chosen representative on earth,” said Rick Kuhn, a professor of politics at Australian National University in Canberra. “But short of that, I don’t think it’s going to happen.”Saturday’s election will end the longest campaign season in modern Australian history. The contest, although officially declared by Mr. Rudd last month, has effectively been under way since January, when Ms. Gillard announced, unusually early, that the vote would be held in September. That opened an acrimonious nine-month political slog during which Ms. Gillard’s popularity, and support within her own party, collapsed.Mr. Rudd came back into office promising a kinder, gentler brand of politics in place of the adversarial relationship between Ms. Gillard and Mr. Abbott. Indeed, Mr. Abbott is perhaps best known outside Australia for a blistering speech Ms. Gillard delivered in Parliament last year, in which she called him a misogynist and a sexist with “repulsive double standards.”A former Roman Catholic seminarian with socially conservative stances on abortion and gay marriage, Mr. Abbott is closer ideologically to the American Republican Party than to European conservatives like Prime Minister David Cameron’s Tories in Britain.He has made the repeal of a carbon-trading plan passed by Ms. Gillard the centerpiece of his campaign, and as recently as 2009 he denied the existence of climate change caused by humans.Opinion polls show that Australians overwhelmingly support both abortion rights and legalizing same-sex marriage and accept the majority scientific opinion that human activity has contributed to climate change.Owing at least in part to his conservative views, and because he is not known as a naturally gifted speaker, Mr. Abbott has struggled to connect with voters.Still, Mr. Abbott’s hard-nosed political skills have allowed him to capitalize on the perception that Labor has lost its way as a party, said John Wanna, a political science professor at Australian National University.“I think one of the big messages from this time, when we look back in history, will be that Labor spent four years tearing itself apart, and I think the electorate has gotten tired of that,” Mr. Wanna said.Despite Mr. Rudd’s stated intention of running a positive campaign focused on the issues, this election cycle has stood out for the level of negativity deployed not just by the rival political parties, but also by the news media.Mr. Rudd in particular has come in for unusually pointed criticism from publications owned by Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation.Last month, The Daily Telegraph, Mr. Murdoch’s tabloid in Sydney, ran a series of anti-Rudd editorials on its front page, including one in which he was depicted as Colonel Klink from the 1965-71 American television comedy series “Hogan’s Heroes,” wearing a Nazi uniform and a monocle.On Thursday, Clive Palmer, a mining magnate who founded his own center-right party that is likely to peel away some votes from the opposition coalition, said he would sue Mr. Murdoch over a front-page article in his flagship national paper, The Australian. The article in question called Mr. Palmer “a buffoon” and said he posed a threat to democracy.“It’s time this fellow was brought to account, this foreigner who tries to dictate what we do,” Mr. Palmer said in an interview with Channel 7 TV; Mr. Murdoch is a native of Australia who holds American citizenship.