ISLAMABAD, Pakistan —  Secretary of State John Kerry offered an unexpected lift to Egypt’s military leaders on Thursday, saying they had been “restoring democracy” when they deposed the country’s first freely elected president, Mohamed Morsi, on July 3 after mass demonstrations against his rule.“The military was asked to intervene by millions and millions of people” who feared the country would descend into chaos, Mr. Kerry said during a visit to Pakistan, a country that has seen four military coups since the 1950s. In Egypt, Mr. Kerry said, “The military did not take over, to the best of our judgment — so far.”His comments echoed those of Egypt’s defense minister, Gen. Abdul-Fattah el-Sisi, who has said that he repeatedly warned Mr. Morsi to change course and that he was carrying out the people’s will by deposing him. Mr. Kerry’s blunt comments represented the strongest endorsement yet by the United States of the military intervention, which the Obama administration has refused to call a coup.Using that term would require the United States to suspend its annual $1.5 billion aid package, a move that American officials assert would further destabilize Egypt. Instead, the administration has found a way to avoid the question altogether, deciding last week that it was not legally required to determine whether the military had engineered a coup or not.On Thursday, tens of thousands of Mr. Morsi’s Islamist supporters continued their sit-ins at two Cairo squares, defying intensifying warnings from the Egyptian authorities to abandon the protests or face their dispersal by force.An Interior Ministry spokesman appealed to the protesters to “give priority to the interest of the homeland, to comply with the public interest and to quickly leave and evacuate.” The ministry promised “safe exit and complete protection” to all who complied, said the spokesman, Hany Abdul-Laatef.The protesters have vowed to remain in the squares until Mr. Morsi is released from military detention and restored as president. On Wednesday, Egypt’s military-backed government ordered the police to break up the protests, saying they posed a threat to “national security.”The authorities have accused the protesters of hoarding weapons and torturing people in the squares, and say that the rallies have become a nuisance to local residents. The government order raised the specter of another violent confrontation, less than a week after Egypt’s security forces opened fire on protesters outside one of the sit-ins, killing at least 80 people.Responding to the Interior Ministry warning, an alliance of Mr. Morsi’s supporters said that the sit-ins were peaceful and would continue, and that the alliance “places full responsibility on the coup leaders for any acts of violence or killings.”Late Thursday night at the larger of the two sit-ins, outside the Rabaa al-Adaweya mosque, the warnings seemed only to attract more protesters. On stage, a speaker called for Mohamed Ibrahim, the interior minister, to be put on trial and cursed General Sisi, imploring God to poke his eyes out.Mr. Kerry, speaking to the private Geo channel in Pakistan, said he was concerned about the turmoil and had told top Egyptian officials, including General Sisi, that a violent crackdown was “absolutely unacceptable.”“It cannot happen,” he said.“Now, as you know, these situations can be very confusing and very difficult,” Mr. Kerry continued, saying the United States was working with officials of the European Union and foreign ministers of other countries “to try to see if we can resolve this peacefully.”“The story of Egypt is not finished yet,” he said, “so we have to see how it unfolds in the next days.”