JERUSALEM — Israel’s attorney general on Wednesday advised ministers across the government to immediately end gender segregation in public spaces, issuing guidelines that would change many aspects of daily life here — from buses to burials, health care to radio airwaves.The attorney general, Yehuda Weinstein, called on public agencies “to act fast, efficiently and decisively,” adding that “behavior aimed at preventing women from receiving public services with equal conditions” should be subject to criminal prosecution.While the advisory itself is not binding, regulations and legislation that would be are widely expected to be adopted in the coming weeks, with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu already having expressed general opposition to such segregation.The sweeping ruling comes after several years of mounting tension and legal battles over the treatment of women in Israel’s public sphere. Until a 2011 Israeli Supreme Court ruling, women were required to sit in the back on bus lines traveling through ultra-Orthodox neighborhoods, which set off civil disobedience campaigns involving many Jews from overseas. The ruling made such manadtory discrimination illega, it allowed women and men to sit separately, but only if they did so voluntarily.The issue is part of a larger struggle over identity between the growing ultra-Orthodox minority and the rest of Israel, as Mr. Netanyahu’s new government moves to end widespread exemptions from the army for yeshiva students; integrate them into the work force; cut back subsidies that their large families rely on; and overhaul the curriculum in their schools.“It’s a very important message saying we will not let religious extremism take over,” said Ronit Heyd, director of Shatil, a coalition of groups that fights segregation. “Israel can be both a Jewish and a liberal, democratic state. Once the religious law takes over the democracy, that’s where we’re in danger.”Mr. Weinstein’s statement said that all seats on all buses must be open to everyone, with all passengers entering through the front door; that women must be allowed to deliver eulogies; that seating at public ceremonies must be mixed; and that signs advising women to dress modestly cannot be posted on neighborhood streets. It also gave the broadcasting authority six months to work out an arrangement with a prominent ultra-Orthodox radio station to end its ban on female broadcasters and callers from many programs.Yedidia Z. Stern, vice president of the Israel Democracy Institute, said that most Israelis would welcome the changes, and that ultra-Orthodox politicians, who were shut out of Mr. Netanyahu’s current coalition government, had little chance of stopping them from becoming law.But while Mr. Stern agrees with the prohibitions on segregation of buses and government or military ceremonies, he questions whether street signs in insular neighborhoods and radio programs geared to a narrow audience form a separate, quasi-public category that should be considered differently. And he worries that given the larger struggle over the integration of the ultra-Orthodox, the new rules could fuel the flames.“From their point of view, this is a huge attack against their style of life, trying to change their identity, trying to convert them to something they don’t want to be,” Mr. Stern said. “Now it’s something that has to do with values. Not only should you be part of us and don’t have any benefits, but also we tell you how to behave. That’s how they will see it.”