MADRID —  At just 34 years old, Pablo Ruz was a surprising choice to replace Baltasar Gárzon, Spain’s most famous investigative judge, when Mr. Gárzon was 
 suspended for illegal eavesdropping. But Judge Ruz quickly made himself a household name, driving the investigation of payments to Popular Party politicians that now threatens Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy, who is scheduled to appear before Parliament on Thursday to explain his party’s finances.For better or worse, the case has made Judge Ruz Spain’s latest “juez estrella,” or star judge. But, as the case slowly unwinds, shaking up Spanish politics with a stream of leaks to the news media of evidence and testimony from closed-door hearings, it has also revealed what the judge’s detractors and supporters alike concede are the flaws of Spain’s justice system.The public and politicians of all stripes seem to agree that the nation’s courts are overwhelmed, easily politicized and prone to debilitating delays, and that the course of justice too often turns on the personalities and preferences of vastly overburdened judges.Spain’s courts have been inundated with about 800 corruption cases since the financial crisis began in 2008, and some of the cases are aimed at once-untouchable institutions, including the royal family. The significance and scale of the cases are such that judges — who take the lead in investigations here, rather than prosecutors — now often seem to upstage politicians as the country’s most important decision-makers.“Spain is suffering from a politicization of justice and a judicialization of politics,” said Antonio Garrigues, the chairman of Garrigues, one of Spain’s largest law firms. The news media, he added, bring “scandal, and the kind of very passionate climate in which it becomes almost impossible to reach fair and correct verdicts.”Or any verdict at all, it often seems. Just a handful of the 800 corruption cases have resulted in convictions or reached any conclusion to date. The majority languish for years.“Spanish courts are simply not prepared, and don’t have the means to deal with the kind and quantity of cases that we have recently been seeing,” said Joaquim Bosch, a magistrate who is also the national spokesman for Judges for Democracy, an association seeking to improve Spain’s judiciary.Judge Bosch estimated that the caseload had grown twofold to threefold over the last five years of proliferating scandals, leaving the courts that specialize in financial or political corruption cases “on the brink of collapse.”In the meantime, the judiciary has accumulated a backlog of more than three million unhandled complaints, a burden that judges expect to grow with government budget cuts. In February, more than 2,000 judges and magistrates held a one-day strike to protest worsening work conditions.As a result of such delays, persistent leaks and no small measure of their own scandals, Spain’s courts are regarded with a public distrust almost on par with the record-low approval ratings of corruption-tainted politicians. In a poll conducted for the newspaper El País, 92 percent of 1,000 people surveyed by telephone in January agreed that the slowness of the courts made it harder to combat corruption. The poll, conducted by Metroscopia, had a margin of sampling error of three percentage points.“Spain now faces the biggest judicial workload in Europe,” said José Luis González Armengol, the senior judge on Madrid’s main regional court. “But our resources are unfortunately too limited to deliver what is expected.”This month Judge Ruz came in for criticism after Luis Bárcenas, the former treasurer who is suspected of operating a Popular Party slush fund, appeared in a closed-door hearing — and the Spanish news media started leaking testimony before it was even completed. The judge has not given interviews, and the national court said he was unavailable for comment.Judge Ruz is not the only judge whose proceedings have upset the country’s elite. Judge José Castro, from the court in Palma de Majorca, has been the driver of an investigation into whether King Juan Carlos’s son-in-law, Iñaki Urdangarin, embezzled millions from sports contracts received from regional politicians.Recently, Vicente Martínez Pujalte, a lawmaker from the Popular Party, denounced Judge Castro as seeking “personal protagonism.” As such, he added, “I have the impression that what he wants is not to close the case but to prolong it.”While judges bridle at such remarks, many indeed possess the power to stall or speed up cases, and to decide just how far to pursue investigations. When it comes to the many convoluted strands of corruption that have dominated Spain’s courts recently, the most complex cases can take years to untangle.Judge Ruz’s case, for instance, grew out of a seemingly mundane graft investigation begun in 2009 by his predecessor, Mr. Gárzon, into allegations of kickbacks to regional Popular Party politicians. Few expect a resolution before the end of Mr. Rajoy’s scheduled mandate in 2015 and the next election.Such delays have fed public disillusionment. But magistrates like Judge Bosch argue that government obstructionism and faulty police cooperation, rather than overworked judges, should bear most of the blame for the slow hand of justice.“It’s true that corruption cases can last 10 years, but if politicians are among the suspects, you can be sure that they won’t provide the judiciary with the resources and police support to work efficiently,” Judge Bosch said.Mr. Rajoy’s government is preparing a judicial overhaul that would shift the balance of power within the courts and put prosecutors back in the lead investigative role. The overhaul would result in “a system more resembling the Anglo-Saxon one, more reasonable and normally preferred by lawyers,” said Gonzalo Ulloa, president of Gómez-Acebo & Pombo, a leading Spanish law firm.But given its troubles in the courts, the impulse for change coming from the Rajoy government is not uniformly trusted. “All of the reforms that we are seeing are about increasing political control over the judiciary, which runs contrary to the principle of the division of powers and is particularly dangerous at a time when so many cases involve political corruption,” said Judge González Armengol, of Madrid’s main court.The overhaul could nonetheless reduce the workload of judges like Judge Ruz who, as an interim appointee, was scheduled to return from the national court to a courtroom in a Madrid suburb. Given the importance of the case, however, Judge Ruz secured an extension of his mandate this month, making it likely that he will continue leading the case until it reaches a verdict, however long that may take.“Judge Ruz is a great professional,” his ousted predecessor, Mr. Gárzon, told El País in May. “But it makes me itch that corruption cases are eternally delayed.”