Election workers on Friday began the monotonous job of double-checking the results from more than 5,000 lever voting machines used in New York City’s mayoral primary, as William C. Thompson Jr. clung to hope that revised vote totals might make Bill de Blasio face him in a runoff.Laboring in large warehouses in each borough, the workers went machine to machine verifying that the odometerlike vote tallies matched those recorded on the night of the primary on Tuesday, a routine step that is drawing greater scrutiny this year because of the uncertainty about a runoff, and because the machines had not been used since 2009.Mr. de Blasio emerged from the Democratic primary with just above the 40 percent required to avoid a runoff, and Democratic power brokers and labor leaders, eager to turn their sights to the general election, are increasingly rallying around his candidacy.But Mr. Thompson, who won 26 percent, is continuing to contest the race, and it was possible that the recanvassing of the lever machines, as well as the review of tens of thousands of uncounted paper ballots, could push Mr. de Blasio’s share of the vote below 40 percent.Election workers planned to continue scrutinizing the lever voting machines on Saturday. The city’s Board of Elections does not plan to begin reviewing absentee and affidavit ballots until Monday, making it likely that official results will not be known for days.On Friday, Mr. Thompson, a former city comptroller, stayed out of public view, but his campaign released a statement in which he acknowledged the beginning of the recanvassing.“As a democracy, our top priority must be that every vote be counted,” Mr. Thompson said in the statement. He added of the recanvassing, “We expect that process to move forward as accurately and expeditiously as possible.”At an appearance in Brooklyn, Mr. de Blasio, the public advocate, said that Mr. Thompson “has every right” to a full vote count. But he made clear that in his mind, the general election phase of the race had begun.“We are moving forward to the next round of this election one way or the other,” Mr. de Blasio said, standing by supporters outside Long Island College Hospital, which he has worked to keep open. “And we’re very comfortable with that reality.”With a broad smile and a touch of swagger in his remarks, Mr. de Blasio appeared every bit the political front-runner, teasing reporters, leading the crowd in chants and, in a decidedly mayoral move, translating his remarks into Spanish, with a slightly better accent than Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg’s.Asked if Mr. Thompson’s position had left him in limbo, Mr. de Blasio let out a hearty laugh. “Do I look like a man in limbo?” he asked, as the crowd drowned him out in laughter and cheers.In Manhattan, more than 1,100 voting machines were lined up for inspection in rows on two floors of an office building on the Far West Side.When a group of journalists arrived around noon to observe the recanvassing — three hours after it had been scheduled to begin — three election workers were dozing amid the voting machines. Another worker could be overheard on a cellphone expressing alarm that reporters were present to witness their work.To double-check the results, a technician sliced off a plastic tie binding shut the doors to each voting machine. Going one machine at a time, a worker read aloud the vote count for each candidate, and another checked to see whether it matched the tally printed on the corresponding sheet in a white, three-ring binder. If it did not, she wrote the new vote count in red pen.The process was not quick. On one occasion, the team had to search the warehouse for a misplaced voting machine; more than once, the workers in charge of cutting the plastic ties to open the machines wandered away, putting a momentary halt to the vote checking.The Board of Elections expects that recanvassing the machines will take until Sunday, and no adjusted results were released on Friday.