BRICK, N.J. — Last week, the Mantoloking Bridge to Route 35, the road linking seaside towns and generations of memories along the Jersey Shore, finally reopened.But you cannot turn north off the bridge — a State Police checkpoint keeps people out of Mantoloking, where officials say residents may not be allowed to live until summer. Drive south through the next several towns and you have to keep moving: the police question anyone who detours onto side streets and usher them along. These towns finally allowed residents to move back into their homes last week, but they are prohibited from walking outside after 6 p.m.Nearly three months after Hurricane Sandy, this is the stubborn reality of life for these towns at the center of its destruction. The barrier island remains under a state of emergency. Some towns, still under an evacuation order from the governor, are not allowing people into their homes. Others have begun to do so, but only under heavy restriction. For the people trickling back in, the shore feels more like a demilitarized zone than a seaside haven.With so much devastation and so many unanswered questions about rebuilding, a kind of paralysis has set in. Some residents, even those who understand the reasoning, are increasingly chafing against the restrictions, arguing that officials are putting concerns about safety above their right to live in their own homes. Even the beaches are off limits.“In the beginning it used to make me feel safe; you knew that no one was going to come in and cut the pipes,” said Anita Guidice, who is not allowed to enter her home in Ortley Beach, which remains closed even to residents. “Now it feels like Big Brother watching.”She pulled out a tiny notebook in which she had jotted down the dates and times that Ortley Beach allowed residents back to their homes — but only on a bus, and only for a few hours at a time. But life is no easier in Seaside Park, the nearby community where she and her husband are renting: residents need a special permit to get past checkpoints and are allowed to travel only to and from their homes.Ms. Guidice has taken to carrying her lease in her pocketbook to avoid problems at checkpoints: “You don’t want to make waves.”Last week, Brick, Seaside Heights and Toms River declared “repopulation” of almost all streets, allowing residents who had been able to visit their homes for only a few hours at a time to live there again.Mayor Stephen Acropolis of Brick, who has been living with his family in the boat parked in his backyard while he rebuilds his home, said he did not want people to associate a shoreline made famous as a summer paradise with curfews and checkpoints. “We live in an open democracy,” he said. “I want to get back to that.”Still, the mayors of these communities had to consider the dangers that remained. The Brick police chief, Nils R. Bergquist, said he watched a woman walk out her front door and drop waist-deep into sand that had been made soupy by the storm that reflooded much of the island in late December.Many houses remain without electricity, and therefore without burglar alarms. And with few neighbors to keep watch over other’s homes, the chief and his colleagues along the shore pressed elected officials for the restrictions to prevent looting.Though the National Guard pulled up their checkpoints along the barrier island last week, after more than two months of restricting access to its communities, the State Police sent more troopers in, and their cars idle along Route 35 to question anyone who stops. Only residents and contractors are allowed on side streets. Residents who go out between 6 p.m. and 5 a.m. have to drive, not walk. And the police have set up machines to take pictures of the license plate of every car that travels along Route 35.While cleanup has begun, there are still many homes here blown open by the storm. Piles of appliances and debris line Route 35. In Brick, a middle-class community of 75,000 said to have more oceanfront property than any other town in New Jersey, the storm rendered more than 200 homes uninhabitable, including 109 that burned just after the hurricane hit land. South of here, Seaside Heights looks more like a moonscape than a town, with sand swirled around homes and more heavy equipment than people on the streets. In Mantoloking, a town of 300 where 60 homes were completely destroyed by the storm, officials say another 200 houses may have to be demolished before it can safely reopen. The town still has no power.Deborah Menzel cried last week as she drove over the Mantoloking Bridge to get to her home on the island after staying at a hotel two hours north for weeks. She had awakened at 3 a.m. excited to finally get home. Still, she said: “My husband asked me, ‘Do you really want to live here?’ I said, ‘What’s my option?’ ”Lester Kurylo moved back to his house to protect it from looting once the National Guard left, even though there was still no heat on the first floor and he would not be able to go for his evening walks. The other year-round residents on his street have not come back. “I just don’t look left or right,” he said. “I’ve seen too much devastation.”The recovery has stalled as people debate whether it is worth it to rebuild their homes, and if so, how high they must raise them according to updated federal flood elevation maps. Proposed maps were released last month, but they will not be final for two years. The uncertainty has left many feeling as if they are on borrowed time.Some residents cannot move back in because their homes are still too damaged to be hooked up to electricity or gas or water. And some whose utilities are restored hesitate to return to areas that feel like ghost towns.“I’m not in a hurry to go back,” said Kim McGovern, who has been staying on the mainland section of Toms River rather than return to her home in Chadwick Beach, even though her power was restored a week ago. “Everyone on my street who is year-round will not be back for months.”State officials have made “Memorial Day” their mantra — they want to rebuild the shore by then to save the tourist season. But officials here are less certain about how much can be done by then. Some boardwalks will be rebuilt, most beaches will be reopened, repairs will have begun along Route 35. And the state of emergency will be lifted, though local officials give no specific timeline. They evaluate, as Chief Bergquist said, “day by day.”Until then, Ms. Guidice would be satisfied with finally receiving permission to sleep in her own bed. “Just like everybody else,” she said, “we want to know when we’re going to get back in.”