BANGKOK —  Antigovernment protests that have left five
 people dead and several hundred injured over the past week in Thailand paused for a hiatus on Thursday to allow celebrations of the 86th birthday of King Bhumibol Adulyadej.The king, who has intervened in previous political standoffs during his 67 years on the throne, did not directly address the protests in a short speech to his subjects, saying only that Thais should “help each other for the national interest.”Protesters have vowed to overthrow the government and rid the country of its most influential political family.Ultra-monarchists, frustrated with grinding cycles of political turmoil, have in recent years advocated replacing the country’s parliamentary democracy with a government of technocrats appointed by the king. A similar plea was made in recent days by the protesters, who have occupied major government buildings for more than a week.But the king has rejected this idea in the past, and his appearance on Thursday underlined his frailty. He arrived at the televised ceremony, held in a hall of his palace in the beach resort of Hua Hin, in his padded wheelchair and sat impassively as Thai officials delivered their oaths of allegiance using the highly formal vocabulary reserved for addressing the monarch.The king’s breathing appeared labored, and when it was his turn to speak, he read very slowly from a piece of paper, pronouncing each word in a raspy voice.“Our country has been peaceful for a long time because we are united in our country and perform duties for the sake of the national interest,” he said, pausing several times as he read.In a sign of his infirmity, the sentence took a full two minutes to read. The camera frequently cut away from the king during the pauses, showing stone-faced political and military leaders in the hall.Also in attendance were Crown Prince Maha Vajiralongkorn and other important members of the royal family. But Queen Sirikit, who is also ailing, was absent.As the king was being wheeled out of the hall, a crowd of his subjects outside wept and repeatedly shouted, “Long live the king!”The king moved to Hua Hin this year after spending four years in a hospital in Bangkok. He lives in a palace named Far From Worries.Suthep Thaugsuban, the protest leader, has vowed to restart the demonstrations on Friday in Bangkok. In an interview published Thursday in The Bangkok Post, Mr. Suthep said he would lead a “peaceful coup of the people.”Protesters have occupied the Finance Ministry building and a large government complex and have laid siege to numerous other government buildings and cut power to others.The goal of the protests is to rid the country of the influence of Thaksin Shinawatra, a former prime minister who was forced out by the military in a 2006 coup. Mr. Thaksin’s youngest sister, Yingluck Shinawatra, is the current prime minister. She and other members of the government were in attendance at the king’s birthday ceremony.