Mohamed al-Hadi, an antigovernment activist in Syria, had just received a Skype briefing from rebels about the Ming military airport near the northern city of Aleppo, a protracted battleground in the country’s civil war. Then he learned that the United States government had the ability to monitor that call, as well as a broad range of other information transmitted through the Internet.“I’m really shocked,” he said in a Skype conversation. “Eighty percent of our secrets were already known to the Americans. Now, all of our secrets are disclosed.”In Syria and other conflict zones, activists and militants with diverse politics expressed collective outrage on Friday over the disclosures about the global scope of American data mining and surveillance of phone records and private information conveyed through the Internet, including conversations on Skype, the popular messaging system.In so doing, Taliban fighters and Qaeda operatives found themselves on the same side of a debate as human rights activists, privacy advocates and conservative civil libertarians.Some said they would be far more cautious and selective in their use of Skype and the other Internet communication tools that have become so accessible in recent years. Many were particularly angry and cynical that the Obama administration, which has promoted the free-flow of information, open government and unfettered thought, appeared, in the name of protecting Americans against terrorist attacks, to be secretly practicing the same police-state behavior it has so loudly denounced.“This definitely undermines the administration’s credibility, especially when defending freedom of expression and communication,” said Hadi Ghaemi, the executive director of the International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, an advocacy group based in New York.Mr. Ghaemi’s sense of betrayal was reinforced by his group’s Web site, which was still praising the administration for loosening restrictions last week on the sale of personal communications technology to Iranian citizens in advance of elections next Friday. A statement on the Web site called that decision “a critical step in providing Iranian citizens with safe and secure access to communications tools, enhancing their freedom of expression and access to information, which the Iranian government is trying to deny them at every turn.”Iran’s own state-run news media even took a swipe at the administration’s data surveillance policy, citing the administration’s American critics. The semiofficial Mehr News Agency quoted Senator Bernard Sanders, independent of Vermont, as saying, “The United States should not be accumulating phone records on tens of millions of innocent Americans.”“That is not what democracy is about,” he said.Some of the angriest criticism abroad was heard from the insurgency in Syria, where rebel fighters were already suspicious of American motives because the United States had resisted their pleas for weapons in a war that has left 80,000 people dead in the past two years. Some saw the surveillance as proof that the administration was even quietly sharing information with their enemy, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.“Our activists usually send us confidential information which cannot be published,” said Rami Abdul Rahman, the founder of the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a group based in Britain with a network of informants inside Syria. “We have fears that this information might be leaked to the Syrian regime.”“Let the Americans recruit their own organizations whom they’re paying millions of dollars to get information and not spy on us,” he said.In Pakistan’s tribal areas, some said they had long assumed that Internet tools like Facebook, Google and Twitter were really Western surveillance mechanisms. “We have been saying that these forums are Zionist creations to pave the way for a new world order and to keep an eye on people around the world,” said one commander, Ihsanullah Ihsan. Another said his operatives used messengers to convey critical information, avoiding the phone or the Internet.“These guys are pretty savvy with modern devices,” said Khalid Aziz, a former chief secretary of Pakistan’s tribal belt, speaking by phone from Peshawar. “They already suspect this,” he said, referring to the American surveillance program.It is widely known among the Taliban, for example, that American intelligence found Osama bin Laden’s Pakistani hideout in May 2011 partly by tracing a courier’s phone calls to his family in Kuwait, Mr. Aziz said. Nonetheless, he said, the latest publicity would probably cause militant groups to be more careful. “It will drive caution into the minds of the terrorists to think, ‘Look, these people have oversight, so let’s not do these things over the Internet,’ ” he said.Some groups that face American scrutiny took precautions long ago to try and shield themselves from electronic eavesdropping and dependence on Internet communications. Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shiite militant group that the United States and Israel regard as a terrorist organization, for example, has invested much time and money, assisted by Iran, in building its own communication networks. Attempts to reach some of the most extreme militant groups that concern the United States for comment about the American surveillance were not immediately successful.Another group, Jamaat al-Muslimeen, an Islamic organization in the Caribbean once linked by the American authorities to a plot to blow up Kennedy International Airport in New York, was surprisingly mellow about Washington’s surveillance practice. “I do not have a problem with that,” said Kala Akii Bua, a spokesman for the group in Trinidad and Tobago. “The U.S. government has to look after their security.”Human rights organizations based in the United States expressed alarm about the surveillance in part because it could compromise their ability to communicate with political dissidents and abuse victims in other countries who had assumed their conversations were secure.“Obviously it casts a chill, for people who are vulnerable, subject to persecution, living in situations where there may be any number of perpetrators of torture and sexual violence who could be after them,” said Susannah Sirkin, the director of international policy and partnerships at the Physicians for Human Rights, an advocacy group based in Cambridge, Mass., that has operated in locales including the Democratic Republic of Congo, Bahrain and the Turkish-Syrian border.“In terms of human rights violations, these people may think twice about communicating with a U.S.-based group like ours,” she said. The American government’s surveillance, she said, “sends a message to other governments, so that’s also disturbing.”Frank Jannuzi, deputy executive director of Amnesty International and the head of its Washington office, said he was particularly galled because less than four months ago the Supreme Court dismissed a lawsuit that his group and others had brought. The case was aimed at challenging the federal law that broadened the government’s power to eavesdrop on international phone calls and e-mails. The court ruled in a 5-to-4 decision that the plaintiffs’ claims that they could be harmed was speculation and that they had no legal standing to sue.“What we’ve learned in the last 48 hours convinces us that our lawsuit was valid,” Mr. Jannuzi said. “It turns out our ‘speculation’ was well-informed, prescient even.”