SEOUL, South Korea — The children of a former military dictator of South Korea, Chun Doo-hwan, said on Tuesday that they would pay 167 billion won, or $154 million, that their father owed the government in fines.“We bow deeply in apology,” Chun Jae-kook, the eldest son of Mr. Chun, said in a family statement that he read in front of the prosecutors’ office in the South Korean capital, Seoul, on Tuesday.Their decision closes a chapter on South Korea’s prolonged struggle with the legacy of one of its most brutal former leaders.Mr. Chun, then an army major general, came to power in a coup in 1979 after the assassination of another military-backed strongman, President Park Chung-hee, the father of the current South Korean leader, President Park Geun-hye. Mr. Chun ruled until 1988, when he was succeeded by Roh Tae-woo, his partner in the 1979 coup.After South Korea’s transition to democracy, Mr. Chun and Mr. Roh were convicted of treason for their roles in the coup and in a 1980 military crackdown on a pro-democracy uprising in the southern city of Kwangju that left hundreds dead. They were also convicted of collecting huge bribes from big business while in office.In 1997, Mr. Chun was sentenced to life in prison and Mr. Roh to 17 years. Although they were later pardoned and freed, Mr. Chun and Mr. Roh failed to pay the $203 million and $248 million that they were fined.Mr. Chun has so far paid only a quarter of his fine, claiming to have only $267 in his bank accounts. But opposition lawmakers have said he may have huge assets stashed away.The statute of limitations on confiscating assets from Mr. Chun was to expire this year. But in June, the National Assembly passed a bill that extended it to 2020 and allowed prosecutors to collect from his family members as well if they can prove that any of their properties originated from Mr. Chun’s illegal funds.Prosecutors have since raided 90 facilities owned by the Chun family members, confiscating a total of $83 million worth of assets. Mr. Chun’s brother-in-law was arrested on tax evasion charges this month. Chun Jae-yong, one of the former leader’s three sons, is also under investigation on similar charges.Chun Jae-kook said he and his two brothers and sister would give up buildings, land, paintings and other assets to help pay their father’s fine. He said the house where Mr. Chun and his wife live would also be sold to help pay the fine, though he asked government officials to let his parents live there until they die. Mr. Chun is 82.Lee Jin-han, a senior prosecutor, told reporters that the assets prosecutors have secured so far from Mr. Chun’s family members, including those they said they would give up on Tuesday, amounted to $156 million, enough to cover Mr. Chun’s unpaid fine.Mr. Roh paid off his fine this month. His brother and a businessman whose daughter divorced Mr. Roh’s son helped him pay the $21 million he still owed.