TOKYO —  Japan’s finance minister on Thursday publicly retracted comments he made this week that appeared to call on Japan’s current conservative government to emulate Hitler’s takeover of prewar Germany. The gaffe underscored the potential for disputes over Japan’s own wartime history to derail its popular prime minister, Shinzo Abe.The finance minister, Taro Aso, insisted that his comments on Monday, in which he seemed to say that Japan should learn how the Nazi party quietly rewrote Germany’s Constitution, were taken out of context. Faced with growing criticism in Japan and abroad, he countered that he had never meant to praise the Nazis. He said he had hoped to prompt debate in Japan over whether to change its current pacifist Constitution to allow a full-fledged military, as many conservatives now seek.Still, the uproar over the comments by Mr. Aso, an outspoken nationalist who is also known for slips of the tongue, seemed to confirm the fears of some Japanese and other Asians that members of Mr. Abe’s government want to revise current views of World War II to present Imperial Japan, an ally of Nazi Germany, in a more positive light. The gaffe was also the latest in a string of recent events, including nationalistic displays by South Korean and Japanese fans at a soccer game, that have raised concerns that disagreements over interpreting the war could isolate Japan from the rest of Asia, where there are still bitter memories of Japan’s early 20th-century empire building.The comments come at a time when there has been intense attention on where Mr. Abe, who has long been a leading figure on Japan’s far right, might lead his long-rudderless nation after his governing Liberal Democratic Party’s decisive victory in upper house elections last month. Critics have speculated that he may adopt a nationalistic agenda like the one he pursued during his first term as prime minister seven years ago, when he drew outrage in South Korea and even the United States for denying that Koreans and women from other conquered nations had been forced to serve as prostitutes for Japanese soldiers during the war.However, Mr. Abe has so far appeared to steer clear of such historical controversies, focusing his second term on policies to revive Japan’s stagnant economy. The question, analysts say, is whether Mr. Abe and members of his government, who have spoken of restoring not only Japan’s economy but also its pride, can keep adhering to the politically successful moderate line.“Mr. Abe knows that with one wrong word he can undo all that he has accomplished,” said Harumi Arima, an independent political commentator. “The stock market is up, and so are his approval ratings, so he is being very careful not to say the wrong things that bring this all crashing down again.”Mr. Arima said that the Liberal Democrats had learned from the missteps this year of another vocal nationalist, the once-popular mayor of the western city of Osaka, Toru Hashimoto, who alienated mainstream voters with comments that seemed to justify the system of wartime brothels. Analysts say Mr. Abe also learned a similar lesson during his own failed first stint as prime minister, when he lost public support for trying to rewrite textbooks and the Constitution instead of focusing on pocketbook issues.This time Mr. Abe has sought to avoid appearing too extreme. He has said his government would adhere to official apologies made in the mid-1990s to the victims of Japanese aggression and also the so-called comfort women who were forced to serve in the wartime brothels — a reversal of his earlier stance.The uproar this week over his finance minister’s comments highlight how emotions over events more than 70 years ago remain potent enough to damage Mr. Abe politically and hurt ties with not only Asian neighbors but also, potentially, the United States, the postwar guarantor of Japan’s military security.The episode began on Monday when Mr. Aso was discussing with a conservative study group how to achieve the long-held rightist goal of revising the Constitution, which was written by American occupiers after the war. Mr. Aso, who served as prime minister five years ago, said they should look at how Hitler’s Nazi party had changed the Constitution of the prewar Weimar Republic “without anyone noticing.”“Maybe we should learn from their techniques,” Mr. Aso said.It was unclear what Mr. Aso meant, since he had earlier in the same talk criticized the Nazis for usurping the Weimar Constitution, which he praised as the most progressive in Europe at the time. Still, the later comment brought an outpouring of criticism for appearing to point to the Nazis as a model, as well as presenting what historians called an incorrect view of what was actually a violent takeover by the Nazis.The comments created an immediate uproar in Asia, where the South Korean and Chinese news media portrayed them as yet more evidence that Mr. Abe has been leading his nation to the nationalistic right. The comments also drew criticism from some in the United States, a more worrisome development for Mr. Abe, who has vowed to maintain close ties as Japan faces tension with China over disputed islands.On Tuesday, the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a Jewish human rights group based in Los Angeles, posted a statement on its Web site demanding that Mr. Aso explain himself.“What ‘techniques’ from the Nazis’ governance are worth learning — how to stealthily cripple democracy?” the statement asked.