BOISE, Idaho — Somewhere in America, supposedly, there is a debate about regulating guns. But it is hard to find here.In Idaho’s graceful, striated-marble Capitol, home to one of the more ardent and adamant state legislatures in the nation in standing up for the Second Amendment, lawmakers from both parties say that a torrent of public passion, even panic, about new proposed federal gun rules is pushing in only one direction: toward more guns, not fewer.If Idahoans, like Americans in many states, have rushed to buy guns out of fear for personal safety in the aftermath of recent mass shootings, or out of fear of tighter legal controls, then democracy has already spoken, many lawmakers said. People have voted with their pocketbooks.“Enable them to do what they believe is right,” said State Senator Marv Hagedorn, a Republican who was designated to be his chamber’s point man on proposed gun legislation in the session that began in January, describing what he sees as his mandate. “There’s a huge call to all of us to protect the Second Amendment rights.”Every level of government in every state is, without question, looking more closely at issues of public safety since the slaughter in Newtown, Conn., of 20 children and 6 adults in an elementary school in December. But in deeply conservative states like Idaho, where President Obama got less than 33 percent of the vote in November — one of his worst showings in the nation — the discussion of school safety is occurring behind a kind of Chinese wall, separate from the question of whether certain types of guns or high-capacity magazines are to blame.Some Democrats in the Republican-controlled Legislature are pushing for an expansion of mental health care spending this session — Idaho has one of the highest suicide rates in the nation, mostly by gun — but they are confronting, they said, the same torrent of fear and fury from constituents about a perceived threat from Washington to gun-owners’ rights as their Republican colleagues.The Idaho Department of Education has also been meeting to talk through the new terrain of school safety, even as some districts have said that they may move ahead on their own in allowing teachers and administrators to be openly armed, as Idaho law already permits.“We’ve heard all sorts of things,” said Matt McCarter, who, as the department’s director of student engagement and postsecondary readiness, is leading the safety evaluation. Beyond talk of more guns, for example, he said he had heard from districts that were talking about attack dogs, and one that was pondering a kind of box mounted to the ceiling that could be dropped to trap an intruder.“I said, ‘Does it come with a moat?’” Mr. McCarter said.Gov. C. L. Otter, who has asked for a report on school safety from the recently retired state police chief, said in an interview that allowing people the latitude to keep themselves and their local institutions safe — a sentiment as old as the American frontier, now revived with new political impetus — was the best way forward.“For a long time, you couldn’t carry a gun on an airplane — now the pilots do,” Mr. Otter said. “The captain is in charge here. We’ve got to give him all the tools to make sure that he maintains control as he sees fit.”Other authorities in other spheres of life, he added, have the same responsibilities as pilots. “The captains of the home are the parents. The captains of the schools are the people that run the schools. So, you know, I see a lot of similarities there.”Consider another measure of the moment: the 7 a.m. information session on gun laws for lawmakers held by the Idaho Sheriff’s Association recently in a Capitol basement meeting room. The House majority leader, Mike Moyle, sitting near the back, made the point, for example, that federal authorities were establishing a pattern of enforcing some laws and not others. In Washington and Colorado, where voters have approved legalizing the possession of small amounts of marijuana, he said, federal authorities are indicating a willingness to look the other way, even though marijuana possession remains a federal crime.Was it possible, Mr. Moyle asked, to keep new federal gun regulations from being enforced in Idaho? “If they’re picking and choosing what they’re going to enforce, does the state have any control on the other side, picking and choosing on what we’re going to let them enforce?”Probably not, said the group’s moderator, Mike Kane, a former prosecutor and now a lobbyist for the Sheriff’s Association. “As much as I do understand the sentiment, there is no way that I know legally that would hold up,” Mr. Kane said.The State House has also named Representative Judy Boyle, a Republican, to act as its leader on the gun issue this year. She and Mr. Hagedorn — the gun issue’s point man in the Senate — have known each other for years, she said, through hunting clubs or their membership in the National Rifle Association. Before running for office, she volunteered for the N.R.A. to help pass the state’s concealed weapons law in 1990. Republicans now have a 28-to-7 majority over Democrats in the Idaho Senate, and hold a 57-to-13 majority in the House.Ms. Boyle said one idea that intrigued her was encouraging more advanced weapons training for teachers or other school workers. Mr. Otter also mentioned a gun club in Utah that recently began offering weapons training to teachers. “Two hundred showed up,” he said.Under current Idaho law, no concealed weapons are allowed in schools, but local school boards, at their discretion, can allow people to carry them openly. Being elected to any office in Idaho, from the county highway district commissioner up to the governor, automatically comes with a right to carry a concealed weapon. Mr. Otter said in an interview that he has chosen not to.The speaker of the House, Scott Bedke, a Republican, said that he would not guess what might come from the session, but that the will of the people was clear.“Idaho will push back,” he said, referring to federal gun control proposals. “A question that is rolling around in most Idahoan’s heads right now is, What part of ‘shall not be infringed’ don’t they get?”