ALBANY —  Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo acknowledged on Monday that two of his priorities — enshrining abortion rights more firmly into state law and enacting new anticorruption laws — were not likely to be taken up by the Legislature this year.In a radio interview, Mr. Cuomo said he did not expect the lawmakers to approve either measure before Thursday, when they are scheduled to adjourn for the year.The governor and legislators were still discussing several other issues, including a proposal to ask voters to authorize the expansion of casino gambling, and a plan to offer tax-free space on college campuses for businesses that are starting up or expanding.On Monday afternoon, the governor met with legislative leaders to continue negotiations.The developments of the day reflected an increasingly embittered mood in Albany: Tainted by a series of corruption scandals and at loggerheads over the highest-profile legislative issues, lawmakers seem eager simply to return home.Mr. Cuomo, who in the past has been successful in persuading the Legislature to get behind his agenda, has had a harder time in recent months.And a poll released by Siena College on Monday found him with his lowest job-performance rating, 50 percent, since he took office.In a sign of tension between the governor and legislative leaders, Mr. Cuomo said on Monday that he intended to appoint a commission to investigate the role of money in the state’s political system. He said the commission was necessary because lawmakers were refusing to pass a package of anticorruption measures that he had proposed after the arrests of several lawmakers this spring.The governor has also proposed a public matching funds program for state campaigns that he said would reduce the influence of big donors; critics on the left, however, said he had not seriously pressed the measure, while critics on the right opposed the use of matching funds for that purpose.“This has been an ugly few weeks here in Albany, and it has shaken the public trust,” the governor said on the public radio program “The Capitol Pressroom.”He added, “People feel that there are questions, and I want them to feel confident, and I’m not going to do a half-baked bill.”Mr. Cuomo is a Democrat. Both the abortion and campaign finance proposals have been supported in the Assembly, which is controlled by Democrats. But they have faced a harder time in the Senate, which is controlled by an unusual coalition of Republicans and a faction of breakaway Democrats.He proposed passing the abortion measure as part of a 10-part Women’s Equality Act that would also address pay equality, sexual harassment and human trafficking.Republicans have objected to the abortion language, so on Sunday, the leader of the breakaway Senate Democrats, Jeffrey D. Klein, of the Bronx, introduced a women’s rights package that omitted the abortion provision.In an interview, Senator Klein said that as of Monday, there were not enough votes to pass the abortion measure, and he questioned why advocates and lawmakers were willing to sacrifice the other provisions in the women’s rights package.“We have to come to terms with the fact that the Republican conference in New York State in the State Senate is a right-to-life conference,” Mr. Klein said. “The governor needs to step up his game, show some leadership and identify votes in the Republican conference just as he did with the marriage equality vote.”He added, “I’m not going to bring a bill to the floor to fail.”But in the interview on Monday, Mr. Cuomo said the coalition of women’s groups that had sought the package of legislation had concluded that if the abortion component was not included, they did not want a scaled-down proposal.The Assembly Democratic majority and the mainline Senate Democratic conference also said they would only support a package that included the abortion language, which was intended to codify the Supreme Court’s Roe v. Wade ruling into state law.Andrea Miller, the president of Naral Pro-Choice New York, accused Mr. Klein of giving cover to the Senate Republicans.“It’s simply not good enough to say you’re pro-choice and then refuse the one moment when you have an opportunity to take an absolute, crystal-clear vote,” she said.“You have that moment and you’re going to walk away from that? You cannot call yourself pro-choice.”Mr. Klein’s role in the expected failure of the abortion and campaign finance measures was the subject of much discussion on Monday.Mr. Klein, a former deputy leader of the Senate Democrats, joined forces with Republicans before the start of the legislative session to form a coalition that would govern the chamber after Democrats won a numerical majority in the November election.Mr. Cuomo tartly referred to the breakaway legislators as “theoretically Democrats” on Monday.The coalition of women’s groups broadcast a television advertisement in Mr. Klein’s district over the weekend accusing him of blocking a vote on the abortion measure, and a so-called super PAC that was co-founded by Jonathan Soros said it was prepared to support one or more primary challenges to members of the breakaway caucus.“They’re choosing their own relationship and power with the Republican leader over what the voters of the state want,” said David Donnelly, another founder of the super PAC, Friends of Democracy. “It boils down to that: What’s more important, serving your constituents or your own power?”Mr. Klein said his caucus would continue to push for public financing, and described the criticism from its supporters as “very strange.”“You question the political motivation of the campaign-finance folks,” he said.“Why bombard and bash someone that’s advocating your position?”