JERUSALEM — After six weeks of struggle, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu appeared close Thursday night to finalizing a new governing coalition that may make significant changes on domestic issues like religious pluralism but is likely to be paralyzed on the Middle East peace process.A weakened Mr. Netanyahu would be joined by Yair Lapid and Naftali Bennett, two dynamic first-time politicians who represent vastly different constituencies but share a commitment to integrating ultra-Orthodox Jews into Israel’s military and work force, and who teamed up to increase their negotiating power. The coalition would, for only the third time since 1977, exclude Israel’s ultra-Orthodox parties, but would give both Jewish settlers in the West Bank and the secular bourgeoisie of Tel Aviv more influence.The three men were to sign final agreements Thursday, but the deal was held up by a last-minute dispute over whether Mr. Bennett and Mr. Lapid would have the titles of deputy prime minister, according to spokesmen for all three, who agreed that it was still likely to go through Friday. The deadline for forming a government is Saturday night, and President Obama’s scheduled arrival in Israel on Wednesday has added to the urgency of concluding the negotiations.Many analysts said the new government would underscore the refocusing of Israeli politics onto internal socioeconomic matters, including affordable housing, education and the role of religion in public life, and away from security and foreign policy issues, particularly the Palestinian conflict. While the coalition agreement promises a return to negotiations with the Palestinians, the new housing minister, from Mr. Bennett’s nationalist Jewish Home Party, would be a former chief of the settlers’ council, complicating prospects for progress.“It’s a government that, to a large extent, will depend on its ability to avoid decisions on core issues,” said Guy Ben-Porat, a professor of public policy at Ben Gurion University of the Negev. “People are very concerned with the tactics: who won what. I think it’s going to be measured at the end of the day by who does what, and how. There are two parameters — will the government survive, and will it do anything significant? — and these two things might have an inverse relationship.”If the Palestinian question threatens to divide the parties, there may be more consensus on the middle-class themes that formed the campaign mantra — “sharing the burden” — of Mr. Lapid’s centrist Yesh Atid party, which won a surprising 19 seats in the Jan. 22 election. Mr. Lapid, a television broadcaster, would be finance minister, and with a $10 billion budget deficit, there could be drastic cuts in subsidies to poor people. His party will also control education, and it has promised to overhaul the curriculum of religious schools.Religion, diaspora affairs and the Jerusalem portfolio will be overseen by Mr. Bennett, who will also be economics and trade minister. That could lead to change on matters long controlled by the ultra-Orthodox, including conversion to Judaism, marriage and divorce, as well as things like whether public buses can run on the Sabbath.“There might be an option that the term ‘Jewish state’ will not be a threatening term to many of the Jews, which is the case right now,” said Yedidia Z. Stern, who runs the religion and state program at the Israel Democracy Institute. But, Professor Stern cautioned, “the schism between the ultra-Orthodox and Israeli society might become more severe; the schism between those who have and those who have not might become more severe; and the schism between Palestinians and Israelis will become more severe.”The coalition would include 68 of Parliament’s 120 members, and be led by 22 ministers, including Mr. Netanyahu, down from the 30 that started his prior term, following Mr. Lapid’s insistence on a smaller cabinet. Those left out vowed Thursday to mount a vigorous opposition, warning of class warfare with a “dangerous” government dominated by settlers and “tycoons.”“All those that belong whose common denominator is that they belong to the have-nots, to the second Israel — all these will fight, shoulder to shoulder, until the class gap ceases to exist,” Aryeh Deri, a leader of the ultra-Orthodox Shas faction, wrote on Facebook. “Gone are the days in which there is a coalition, and opposite there is a weak opposition whose voice is not heard.”Hanan Ashrawi, a member of the executive committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization, called the new coalition “a right-wing hard-line government” that “does not bode well for the chances of peace.”“Unfortunately, once again the Palestinians do not have a peace partner in Israel,” she said in a statement. “Once again, there is a government that will continue the previous policies of destroying the two-state solution and the chances of peace.”The consensus among many Israeli political observers was that the big winners in the coalition-building process were Mr. Lapid, who stuck to his principles and always seemed ready to walk away and lead the opposition, and Mr. Bennett, who personally brokered the latest rounds as the deadline — and Mr. Obama’s visit — approached. Mr. Netanyahu faces not only less cooperative coalition partners than in the past, but much dissent within his own Likud Party, which lost several ministerial posts.“Netanyahu is going to have to play it back to the Iranian issue,” said Mitchell Barak, a political consultant. “Anything to do with Iran, security, that’s where he’s most comfortable. That’s where he’s going to be able to gain back his leadership, because he’s the only one people trust enough to be able to handle that.”While Mr. Lapid and Mr. Bennett control most of the ministries dealing with domestic issues, the new defense minister would be Moshe Yaalon, a former chief of Israel’s military from the Likud. The Foreign Ministry remains in Mr. Netanyahu’s hands and is being reserved for Avigdor Lieberman, who heads the Yisrael Beiteinu Party, with which Likud teamed for the election; Mr. Lieberman resigned the post in December after being indicted on a fraud charge, but plans to return if he is exonerated.Tzipi Livni, whose new Hatnua party won six parliamentary seats, will be justice minister, with a special portfolio dealing with the peace process.“We kept power,” Mr. Netanyahu told Parliament members from his and Mr. Lieberman’s parties on Thursday, describing the defense and foreign ministries as the most important. “This term will be one of the most challenged in Israel’s history.”Yossi Klein Halevi, a senior fellow at the Shalom Hartman Institute, called it “an extraordinary moment for Israel.”“On the one hand, our security situation is becoming increasingly desperate, but on the other hand, the political system is for the first time in decades focused on a domestic agenda,” he said. “This is Netanyahu’s great failure because Netanyahu is all about the security agenda, and other parties have stolen the country’s agenda from him.”