YANGON, Myanmar — Nearly a quarter century after it was founded, members of the long-repressed pro-democracy party of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi gathered here for their first party congress, an attempt to revitalize a political organization that some of its own members say lacks competence, efficiency and effective midlevel leadership.The party, the National League for Democracy, is trying to find its footing as Myanmar shifts toward democracy after years of rule by a brutal military junta and ahead of national elections scheduled for 2015. In those elections, the party will face the Union Solidarity and Development Party, which was created by the junta and now controls the majority of seats in Parliament.The three-day meeting, which begins Friday, will feature the party’s first internal elections for its governing bodies, which until now had been appointed by the leadership.Party leaders say thousands of people have joined the National League for Democracy in recent months. While the leadership wants to increase the party’s size and reach, the addition of new members has also generated tensions in the party, which is led by an aging group of former political prisoners.Outside the headquarters of the National League for Democracy on Thursday, former political prisoners said they were wary of the newcomers, many of them defectors from the military-backed governing party.Myo Nyunt, a doctor and former political prisoner, described the new members as “fishy and suspicious.”For those who spent many years in prison, the notion of accepting members from a governing party run by former generals is jarring.Dr. Myo Nyunt said he would vote only for party veterans, preferably former political prisoners he knew during his five years in jail. The comportment of people in prison is a good test of character, he said. He offered these test criteria: “Was he selfish in prison? Was he a good comrade who helped poorer prisoners?”Around 900 delegates will attend the congress, and 120 people will be chosen for the party’s central committee. An instruction sheet handed out to delegates on Thursday said there should be no campaigning. “Delegates are not allowed to make recommendations among the candidates,” it stated. The party also banned members from giving interviews to the news media near the conference.Win Tin, a senior party member, lamented what he described as the party’s deficit of talent.“Most of the members are more or less mediocre at every level,” he said in an interview late last year. “They have no real leadership and no charisma.”Delegates said that even before its official opening on Friday, the congress was off to a rocky start. Htun Tin, a delegate from Kachin State in northern Myanmar, who had traveled 20 hours by bus to the conference, said he was told to arrive at the headquarters at 10 a.m. to pick up his delegate’s access pass. He waited eight hours before it was ready.“The head office has been slightly derelict in their duty,” he said.