ANKARA, Turkey —  Before Thursday, the last time a female lawmaker entered Turkey’s Parliament wearing an Islamic head scarf was in 1999. She was taunted, expelled from the building and later stripped of her Turkish citizenship after it was revealed that she also carried an American passport.But today there is a different Turkey, reshaped over a decade of governing by the Justice and Development Party, which has its roots in political Islam, and so when four of the party’s female members entered the Assembly on Thursday wearing head scarves they were largely accepted, even as it represented, for some, an unwelcome break with Turkey’s secular traditions. For many others, inclined to see the issue as one of personal freedoms, it was an important marker of Turkey’s maturing democracy.After the session, Mevlut Cavusoglu, a senior lawmaker in the governing party, sat in a garden outside Parliament and said, simply, “This is democracy.”Earlier, Gulay Samanci, a member of Parliament from Konya, a religiously conservative town in central Turkey, had walked into the Assembly, watched by a horde of Turkish journalists, wearing a black-and-white silk scarf on her head and was greeted by colleagues with hugs, kisses, handshakes and the snapping of cellphone cameras.The issue has long been a divisive one in Turkish society, pitting secularists versus Islamists. But the entrance of female lawmakers wearing head scarves on Thursday was seen as a milestone for Turkey. And it underscored the depth of change within the society over the last 10 years under Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, an Islamist leader whose party, known by its Turkish initials A.K.P., has sought to allow a great role for religion in the public sphere. The lifting of the head scarf ban was part of a package of democratic changes Mr. Erdogan unveiled in September.While some opposition lawmakers from the secular Republican People’s Party, or C.H.P., expressed opposition, much of the Turkish public seems ready to move beyond the issue: More than 70 percent of the public, in an October survey, supported lifting the ban, according to Ozer Sencar, the director of Metropoll, an Ankara-based polling firm.“It’s an unnecessary and useless debate,” said Saban Kardas, a professor at Ankara’s University of Economics and Technology. “C.H.P. is digging itself deeper.”“Last weekend, I was at a wedding and the bride was wearing a head scarf and the witness was wearing modern dress and a short skirt,” Dr. Kardas added. “This is modern Turkey.”Still, some lawmakers protested: one female member of C.H.P. wore a T-shirt that bore the face of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, who founded the modern Turkish republic from the remnants of the Ottoman Empire after World War I and imposed a secular system.Another C.H.P. member made a different argument: that the head scarf issue, while portrayed by the governing party as an advancement for individual liberties, has served to mask a spotty record on women’s rights.“I expect them to explain why my country is 120th in a global ranking on women’s rights,” the lawmaker, Safak Pavey, said in Parliament. She added, “The greatest insurance for religious freedom is not about controlling our future with religious guidance but providing flawless secularism.”The ban on head scarves in Parliament was not enshrined in law but part of the Assembly’s traditional dress code. The code also bans pants for women.The lifting of the head scarf ban comes at a time of deep polarization here, even if the country is not as divided as it once was over the matter of female dress. Those divisions — between the rural, pious classes and a more secular urban elite — were laid bare by violent protests that began in May in Istanbul and swept across the country.The protests represented the most severe political crisis faced by Mr. Erdogan in his decade in office, and highlighted the degree of anger against his style, which a growing number of Turks view as authoritarian. While advancing democracy on a number of counts — including overcoming a history of coups by securing civilian authority over the military — he has alienated a significant segment of the population by telling women how many children they should have (sometimes it is three, sometimes five), and involving himself personally in controversial urban development projects in Istanbul, the original catalyst for the protests.Still, Mr. Erdogan, who maintained his core constituency of religious conservatives, who make up about half the electorate, emerged from the protest crisis with much of his domestic power intact, even as his image was tarnished abroad.The C.H.P. chairman, Kemal Kilicdaroglu, said the lifting of the head scarf ban was timed by Mr. Erdogan to rally his base before an election cycle that will begin in the spring with a vote for municipal leaders, followed by a presidential election in the summer and end in 2015 with parliamentary elections.Outside Parliament on Thursday afternoon, Nurcan Dalbudak, an A.K.P. lawmaker, cast it in different terms.“There is no longer this issue in Turkey, it has been excluded from the agenda,” she said. “Today is a historical, beautiful day.”