WASHINGTON — The Senate on Thursday shot down competing bills to undo — or at least mitigate the impact of — across-the-board spending cuts in a desultory bit of political theater that ensured the cuts would go into force Friday with a partisan blame game in full tilt.The votes were all but designed to fail. Democrats assembled legislation to replace $85 billion in cuts this year with a mix of tax increases on the rich, corporate taxes and cuts to military and agriculture subsidies with no consultations with Republicans. Republicans, internally divided but desperate for some alternative to the Democratic approach, offered legislation that would have locked in the cuts but would have given President Obama near carte blanche to decide how to mete them out.And fail they did. The Republican bill received only 38 votes out of the 60 needed to be considered for final passage, losing 9 Republican senators. The measure failed, 62 to 38, with two Democrats voting yes. The Democratic bill barely garnered a majority, 51 votes, but needed 60 under the rules adopted beforehand.Even if either had passed, House leaders had sent members home for the weekend by lunchtime and would not have been available to approve a final deal.“I cannot tell you how disgusted I am that when it comes time to cut, because a bunch of politicians can’t get an agreement, we fire the soldiers, keep the politicians,” said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, who voted against both bills.That, too, was theater. The cuts that will hit Friday expressly spare uniformed military personnel. But by the time the final tally was called, no one was taking seriously efforts to head off the cuts. Even a scheduled meeting Friday at the White House between Congressional leaders and the president seemed more about going through the motions than finding a quick solution.“I’m happy to talk to the president. I’m happy to work with the president, but the House has done its job,” Speaker John A. Boehner said Thursday, pointing to two bills passed by the last Congress that are technically defunct. He reiterated his position on further tax increases: “The revenue issue is now closed.”The president tried to keep the pressure on ahead of the Friday meeting, even after the Senate votes. “As a nation, we can’t keep lurching from one manufactured crisis to another,” he said in a statement. “Middle-class families can’t keep paying the price for dysfunction in Washington. We can build on the over $2.5 trillion in deficit reduction we’ve already achieved, but doing so will require Republicans to compromise. That’s how our democracy works.”Attention instead turned to the next Washington budget deadline, March 27, when the current stopgap spending measure expires and the government runs out of money.House Republican leaders, eager to avert a government shutdown that would only compound the effects of the across-the-board cuts, plan to vote next week on a measure to finance the government through the rest of the fiscal year at the levels of the cuts, known as sequestration, or roughly $970 billion.That leaves Senate Democrats with a difficult choice: Go along with the House’s legislation and keep the government open, or insist that the next spending measure address the across-the-board cuts and risk a shutdown.Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader, said he would wait to see what the House produces next week, but suggested that he would like to use the March 27 deadline to revisit the sequestration cuts. “It would be so easy to do,” he said.In fact, nothing has been easy. With time running out, Republicans and Democrats denounced the cuts, but divisions made action impossible. By Thursday, so many Republicans were wedded to the depth of the cuts, if not how they should be distributed, that party leaders settled on legislation that would have given Mr. Obama extraordinary powers to set the course of the federal government over the next seven months, as long as he hit the $85 billion target and Congress did not veto his broad plan.Democrats and the White House rejected it as a buck-passing exercise intended to saddle Mr. Obama with the political consequences of the cuts.“While no amount of flexibility can avoid the fact that middle-class families will bear the brunt of the cuts required by this bill, nothing is asked of the wealthiest Americans,” the White House said. “There is no way to cut spending this dramatically over a seven-month period without drastically affecting national security and economic priorities.”But Republican defense hawks were incensed by it, too.“We’re going to go through a charade here,” Senator John McCain of Arizona said.The Republican bill lost pro-defense senators like Mr. McCain and Mr. Graham but also strict readers of the Constitution, like Ted Cruz of Texas, Mike Lee of Utah and Rand Paul of Kentucky, Republicans who saw it as an unconstitutional transfer of power to the executive.The Democratic position was not much more realistic. The bill ostensibly replaced this year’s cuts with a new minimum tax on income over $1 million, other smaller tax measures, eliminating some farm subsidies and cutting defense in 2014, after most troops are out of Afghanistan.But the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office ruled that the bill would increase budget deficits by $7.2 billion over 10 years, relative to sequestration.“It isn’t a plan at all,” said Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader. “It’s a gimmick. For the president and his allies, that’s the point. They want it to fail, so they can go around the country blaming Republicans.”Three Democrats voted no: Senators Kay Hagan of North Carolina, Mary L. Landrieu of Louisiana and Mark Pryor of Arkansas, all of whom are up for re-election next year. Mr. Reid later switched his vote to no for parliamentary reasons.