MOGADISHU, Somalia —  Somalia’s Parliament voted the prime minister out of office on Monday in a no-confidence motion, with 184 of 249 lawmakers in favor, after what was termed a “constitutional dispute” between the president and the prime minister, Somali officials said.More than 100 members of Parliament filed the motion on Saturday against the prime minister, Abdi Farah Shirdon, accusing him of “ineffectiveness.” Debate on the motion started on Sunday as security in and around Parliament was tightened.Mr. Shirdon asked Parliament on Sunday to be allowed to defend his government against the accusations, but he was rejected.“Two hundred and forty-nine lawmakers voted. One hundred and eighty-four voted in favor of the motion against the prime minister, and 65 lawmakers opposed,” the speaker of Parliament, Mohamed Osman Jawaari, announced. “Therefore, the motion has passed according to the Constitution.”“I will write both the Somali president and the prime minister about the results now, and the prime minister will be in office until the president nominates his successor.” Mr. Osman said.President Hassan Sheik Mohamud said in a statement, “I welcome Parliament’s role as a strong signal of Somali democracy at work.”He added: “It is important to emphasize that the Constitution has been our clear guidance throughout this situation. I recognize the effort and the dedication of the outgoing prime minister and his cabinet in the first one year in office.”Nicholas Kay, the United Nations special representative for Somalia, paid tribute to the prime minister and cited the role played by Parliament.“It was important this unprecedented piece of parliamentary business was managed in accordance with the provisional Constitution and the rules of procedure of the Parliament,” Mr. Kay said. “Somalia’s institutions are coming of age. The U.N. is here to support their development, and looks forward to working constructively with the new administration.”He added: “I hope the president will consult widely before choosing. It is in all our interests that the next P.M. and government is broadly inclusive, able to unite the country and capable of delivering what Somalia needs: peace, rule of law, economic growth and good public services.”The dispute between the president and the prime minister had largely been kept secret until the prime minister’s office issued a statement on Nov. 12 saying “that a dispute between me and the president arose and that dispute is not based on politics but on the Constitution.” The statement did not mention the nature of the dispute.The prime minister took office in October 2012, and his administration has been repeatedly accused of corruption and unauthorized transactions, with many analysts saying they believed that this might have seriously affected the international community’s willingness to support the Somali government.Somalia has long had a weak government, which at times has controlled only small areas of the country.