It used to be that being a bridesmaid was an honor requiring loyalty, friendship, patience and the willingness to wear a clownish taffeta dress that could have been a hit only at a 1980s prom.“There are people who mine the ’80s for inspiration, but they probably didn’t live through it,” said the ready-to-wear and bridal designer Lela Rose, chuckling.“It was just bad,” she added, referring to the exaggerated shapes and stiff textiles. “Taffeta to me always said ‘bridesmaid.’ It’s really any fabric that makes that sound when you walk: ‘tsh tsh.’ ”Bridesmaids today have it significantly better. The niche has spawned sophisticated collections offering attractive, rewearable designs that can occasionally usurp even the bride. Particularly, designers have given wedding parties flexibility in materials, cut and color.Angela Craig, 29, is a nine-time bridesmaid (she calls her wedding party duties “like a second career”).“I’ve had some really hideous bridesmaid dresses,” she said, remembering an “ugly cranberry dress, floor-length, made of cheap fake silk.” (Reality television buffs might tune in to TLC’s “Say Yes to the Dress,” which features a bridesmaid spinoff with episode titles like “I’m Terrified of This Dress.”)Ms. Craig, a senior strategist at Redscout, a marketing consultancy in New York, said she was luckier in the most recent wedding, last month in Chicago. The bride was adamant about no taffeta for her wedding party. Ms. Craig and the bride had visited several stores in Chicago, trying on about 15 dresses. Ms. Craig said she was pleasantly surprised by the quality of the fabrics.Eventually, the party agreed on an empire-waist knee-length plum-colored chiffon frock by Donna Morgan ($178, found in Nordstrom’s wedding section).“Most of us are fit, so we could do the strapless sweetheart neckline, and the chiffon was really good for the price,” she said, while the empire waist was for a bridesmaid who was pregnant.Fabrics that drape are flattering for many women, said Ms. Rose, who also uses chiffon in her bridesmaid collection, which she introduced shortly after her bridal-line debut in fall 2006. She partnered with the Dessy Group to produce the designs, with details borrowed from her ready-to-wear and wedding gowns, some with upscale fabrications like silk gazar. The designs are “very individualized,” she said.“Often there is one detail that brings them all together,” she said, but women can choose among different cuts to suit their body shape but in the same color.That very-uniform look is not very modern, Ms. Rose said: “Some girls look great in anything, but not everyone does. Bridesmaids are part of your pictures, so why wouldn’t you want them to look great?”Her bridesmaid collection is now carried at retailers and on social wedding-shopping sites like WeddingtonWay.com, which was started in 2011 in San Francisco. The site’s founder, Ilana Stern, a former buyer at Bloomingdale’s, came up with the business plan while attending Stanford’s M.B.A. program. A lot of her fellow students were marrying or were part of wedding parties, said Ms. Stern, 30.“People were pouring a lot of time and money into these weddings, but they were complaining a lot,” she said. One of the biggest headaches for brides, she said, was outfitting their bridesmaids. “I know there are jokes out there about bridesmaid dresses, but I didn’t realize brides found it so difficult,” Ms. Stern said.The process is a balancing act: keeping bridesmaids happy while accomplishing a certain cohesive aesthetic, she said. (“There’s nothing worse than an angry bridesmaid who hates what’s she’s wearing and secretly thinks the bride had it in for her,” Ms. Rose said.)Weddington Way’s site links members of wedding parties, offering bridesmaids and groomsmen fashion options to discuss online or to buy. Ms. Stern is now planning her own wedding, for August at the Bel-Air Bay Club in Pacific Palisades, Calif. It will have a beach boho theme and 11 bridesmaids with varying body shapes.“One of my friends is a recent mother and wanted straps,” she said. A couple of other women requested sweetheart necklines, she said. After considering styles from Joanna August, Donna Morgan and Ms. Rose’s line, the group settled on “flowy” dresses by Watters in a similar color scheme, a coral palette but with varying shades to suit different skin tones. There are also five different dress styles.“I really want them to feel good,” Ms. Stern said.Spinning the color wheel is something Tom Mora, head of women’s design at J. Crew, has noticed for a few seasons. The company’s bridal business, started in 2004, first built a name on plentiful color options and several silhouettes to ensure the wedding party matched. But one of the newer developments, he said, was a mix-and-match approach. In a single bridal party, “there are some who really step out with mixed colors and mixed dresses,” he said, suggesting, for example, differing pastels for a summer wedding.Driven by informed customers, the bridesmaid-dress business has also become significantly more soignée.“Women are becoming much more savvy,” Mr. Mora said. “People are actually looking at magazines more than bridal magazines.”Sweetheart necklines are still popular, but one of J. Crew’s best-selling styles is the one-shouldered Kylie in silk chiffon.“It’s just the new way of thinking,” he said. “The idea that women are just wearing cocktail or long formal dresses.”Ms. Craig noted that while shopping for dresses in Chicago, she and the bride visited both bridal and nonbridal departments.“You often can’t tell the difference between a bridesmaid dress or a party one,” she said. “You just have to be sure that it doesn’t show too much skin.”Such is the crossover these days that the designer Alice Temperley, whose bridal line is sold at retailers like Net-a-Porter.com, recommends dresses from her ready-to-wear and contemporary collections for wedding parties. She also creates custom bridesmaid attire for special clients, like the model Jacquetta Wheeler, who was married in England last year. Ms. Wheeler’s bridesmaids were young girls, whom she dressed in white “like little angels,” Ms. Temperley said. “It looked fresh and clean and worked with the church setting.”But Ms. Temperley, who plans to start a bridesmaid collection in October, said white can work for all ages. In England, the prohibition against white (brides only) has waned since Kate Middleton’s royal wedding in 2011, when her sister, Pippa Middleton, made headlines in a snowy Alexander McQueen column. A few months later, Kim Kardashian adopted the look, dressing her sisters in white strapless gowns for her wedding to Kris Humphries.“If I was to get married again, I’d have my bridesmaids wear white,” Ms. Temperley said. She has even attended weddings in Europe at which guests were required to adopt the milky dress code.While the look has trickled down among the fashion-forward set, “it is still about the bride,” Mr. Mora said. Even if J. Crew offers a few bridesmaid styles in white, he said, the designs are simpler than wedding dresses.“Nothing too low cut, and something more universal,” he said.More-voguish options or not, wedding-party dressing is no democracy.“It really depends on the bride,” Ms. Craig said, the nine-time bridesmaid, adding that disasters are still possible. The job description requires giving up negotiating power.“I’m there as her wingwoman,” she said. “You’re there to support your friend and to be prepared for whatever she needs. You just hope it’s not a frumpy dress.”