 TBILISI, Georgia — An angry crowd attacked allies of President Mikheil Saakashvili outside the site for an annual address to the nation on Friday, as Georgia’s five-month-old power-sharing experiment deteriorated into open conflict.A mob surged toward Gigi Ugulava, the mayor of Tbilisi, as the police looked on, unable or unwilling to control a crowd that had taken shape hours earlier and vowed to prevent Mr. Saakashvili from entering. At least five lawmakers from the president’s party were reported injured in the brawl.Mr. Saakashvili’s party, which had dominated Georgian politics for nine years, lost a parliamentary election last year to an opposition coalition, Georgian Dream. It was the first constitutional transfer of power in this country with a long history of civil unrest, and Western leaders hailed it as a breakthrough for the post-Soviet region.But that moment quickly soured. Since Mr. Saakashvili’s presidential term does not end until October, he must serve alongside Bidzina Ivanishvili, the prime minister, who loathes and distrusts him. The new government has cut Mr. Saakashvili down to size, stripping him of his private plane and reducing his household budget, but the president retains the right to dissolve the government and call for new parliamentary elections, levers his opponents fear he will use.Friday’s confrontation began when lawmakers from Mr. Ivanishvili’s coalition canceled Mr. Saakashvili’s address to the nation, which is traditionally delivered in the Parliament chamber.Mr. Saakashvili, defiant, said he would deliver the speech at the national library in Tbilisi. By midday Friday, several hundred protesters — many of them prisoners newly freed by an amnesty that the president had opposed — had gathered outside the building, seething with anger.One of them, Giorgi Gorelashvili, 57, said he had served two years after he was convicted of spying for Russia.“He has no right to make speeches, and we will not allow him in,” he said. “Saakashvili is not the president anymore.”When Mr. Saakashvili’s central allies arrived, 10 minutes before the speech was to begin, protesters began pelting them with eggs. The library’s front door had been decorated with brooms, in a grim reference to a prison abuse scandal last fall, which featured video of a man being sodomized with a broom. Two men repeatedly punched Chiora Taktakishvili, who served as a campaign spokeswoman for Mr. Saakashvili’s party, leaving her dazed and with blood running from one nostril.The fracas ended after about 10 minutes when Mr. Saakashvili’s allies left. Each side has blamed the other for provoking violence. David Usupashvili, the speaker of Parliament, described it to reporters outside as “another spectacle and provocation of Saakashvili, which the protesters unfortunately succumbed to,” the Interfax news agency reported.Among those who had already entered the building when the brawl began were diplomats who had come at Mr. Saakashvili’s invitation, like the United States ambassador, Richard Norland.“There are certain basic principles in democracy, and no matter how strongly you feel about an issue or how much you feel you’ve been wronged, there is no excuse for using violence, for punching parliamentarians as they go in to hear a speech by the president,” Mr. Norland told reporters outside. He warned of reports that crowds were moving toward Mr. Saakashvili’s palace.Mr. Saakashvili made no effort to get into the library. Instead, he invited his loyalists and the assembled diplomats to hear his address two hours later in the president’s palace.At a fruit stand near the site of the brawl, people crowded around a small television to watch coverage of the melee and discuss what had happened and who was to blame.“The only thing left for us, ordinary people, is to pray for peace to return,” Aleksandr Makharashvili, 45, said. “I am afraid there is no way they will be able to shake hands of each other after this.”