
The BaShiTong food court, a collection of small eateries on the third floor of an office building in central Chongqing, China, closed this summer just three months after it opened. Workers sued for back wages. The owner of one spot lost all his savings and barged into the office of the food court’s promoter with a propane tank, taking him hostage and threatening to blow the place up by igniting the tank.        
It was Chinese capitalism in action: very messy, often unfair, sometimes violent. But the BaShiTong hostage incident ended quietly. While litigation continues over the back wages, workers quickly found new jobs, sometimes less stressful ones. Zheng Feng, the athletic, 28-year-old former manager of a dumpling shop in the food court, now sells sportswear at a fashionable shop nearby.        
“It is much easier — plus the air-conditioning is better here,” he said.        
Almost 3,700 kilometers, or 2,300 miles, to the southwest of Chongqing lies the sprawling, overcrowded city of Mumbai, the commercial capital of India. Bharat Petroleum, a state-controlled oil company in India whose sales rank it in the top 250 multinationals, has its headquarters in a dilapidated building in the city’s oldest British colonial neighborhood. A rickety, claustrophobic elevator takes visitors up to the chairman’s elegant office, tastefully decorated with abstract paintings in vivid blues.        
Raj K. Singh, the company’s chairman and managing director, smiled when asked in late August how it treated its workers. Unionized employees performing even menial jobs earned the equivalent of $560 a month until this summer, when a new labor agreement raised their pay to $800 a month. Nonunion workers in India doing the same tasks earn as little as $50 a month, he said. The company’s losses, mainly the result of fuel price regulations but also its own high costs, are heavily subsidized by Indian taxpayers.        
BaShiTong and Bharat Petroleum illustrate several facets of the Chinese and Indian economies. The economies could scarcely be more different. Yet each represents a formidable challenge for Europe in the years ahead.        
Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany repeated tirelessly during her successful re-election campaign this year that Europe has only 7 percent of the world’s population and produces 25 percent of the world’s economic output, but represents 50 percent of the world’s social spending. Sustaining those lopsided percentages requires that Europe remain at the forefront of competitiveness. Europe needs to produce quickly and efficiently a wide range of goods and services that the rest of the world is willing to work much longer and harder to buy.        
That will not be easy. The problems for Europe look formidable.        
China has embraced a version of the rapidly churning, sometimes Darwinian capitalism of the United States, including an almost American acceptance of large holes in the social safety net. Businesses like BaShiTong can and do fail quickly in China. But the resources are swiftly absorbed elsewhere. The country has proved uncommonly adaptable to opportunities in a wide range of markets — including Europe’s.        
To be sure, China and India share two serious handicaps: chronic corruption and pollution. Both problems are particularly troublesome for their people and their economies. Project delays and substandard quality associated with corruption, and eventual cleanup costs associated with pollution, affect their competitiveness. But they do not offset the impressive gains that both countries, especially China, have made in recent years, and continue to make.        
China has quadrupled its output of graduates in the past decade, built national networks of bullet trains and modern highways, and acquired the latest foreign inventions through joint ventures and technology transfer agreements. In the years to come, said Mary Gallagher, director of the Center for Chinese Studies at the University of Michigan, “It’ll have a labor force more like Europe’s, it’ll have an infrastructure more like Europe’s, it’ll have levels of foreign investment that will make it more competitive.”        
A quadrupling of blue-collar wages in the past decade has made China increasingly uncompetitive in areas like garment manufacturing and shoemaking, which are shifting to poorer countries in Asia. But the result has been an accelerated shift by Chinese industry into higher-value sectors vital to Europe. Partly as a result, China’s appetite for European exports is faltering, even as Chinese exports to Europe keep rising.        