REDONDO BEACH, Calif. —  Many in the audience at Marianne Williamson’s appearance here the other night thought they had come to a book signing: They arrived at the Mysterious Galaxy bookstore clutching her texts, expecting a lecture on the journey to inner peace.Instead, they found Ms. Williamson, a best-selling author known for her new age spiritual guide “A Return to Love,” arguing against drone strikes in Yemen, denouncing the influence of money in politics and soliciting donations for her latest campaign — for Congress.After three decades as an author and speaker, Ms. Williamson, 61, is stepping onto a path familiar to California celebrities, with a midlife career shift into politics.It is a transition plenty of Hollywood entertainers have sought to make — take Ronald Reagan and Arnold Schwarzenegger — some more successfully than others. Ms. Williamson, however, would almost surely be Congress’s first new age guru.“I’m sure they’re going to say I’m a new age nutcase, dragon lady, lightweight thinker,” she said, as she waded into the crowd of about 100 people.In these first days of her unlikely campaign, Ms. Williamson is making the case that an injection of her brand of spirituality is what American politics needs. “America has swerved from its ethical center,” she said. “Most of us want to feel that we can have a progressive conversation and contextualize it morally. To me, drone use is a moral issue.”Almost as an afterthought, as if mindful of her new profession, she added, “And also, I think strategically it’s just absurd.”Ms. Williamson has chosen an unusual race for her initial foray into politics. She faces the daunting task of trying to unseat Representative Henry A. Waxman, a popular Democrat who has coasted to re-election for nearly 40 years, in an increasingly Democratic state. The district stretches south along the coast from Malibu, through some of the wealthiest communities in the country.Ms. Williamson will label herself an independent on the June ballot. But in an interview, she described herself as a “lifelong Democrat” and acknowledged that she had voted for Mr. Waxman many times herself.She offered very few substantial policy differences with him, and, perhaps unsurprisingly, she has adopted rhetoric more common to positive spiritual discourse than traditional campaigns, declining to refer to him as her opponent. (“We are just two people applying for the same job,” she said.)As with most celebrity candidates, she is facing questions about why she is running, particularly against someone she disagrees with so little.Mr. Waxman pointedly noted the lack of differences in a written statement, signaling a potential weakness in her challenge.“I’m gratified Ms. Williamson thinks I’m doing a good job and agrees with me on most issues,” he said. “And while some think it would make more sense for her to challenge a Republican and help us regain control of the House, I respect her right to run.”In 2009, Ms. Williamson explored running in a Northern California district near San Francisco. Instead she chose to run in her home district, where she said she would have the best chance to alter the political discourse, which she called her primary goal.“Democracy as we know it is being dismantled in front of our eyes,” Ms. Williamson said. “I can’t any longer toe the line that if we just vote here a little different or vote there a little different, that it will all be O.K., when both major political parties are moving in such a corporatist direction.”She added, responding to critics, “Would a man ever be called vain for speaking his mind?”Bob Shrum, a Democratic consultant, said celebrity candidates had been successful when they had a well-established history of serious political involvement (like Reagan before his successful run for governor in 1966), or they faced another candidate whom the public simply could not stomach (like Mr. Schwarzenegger, who took advantage of the recall against the unpopular Gov. Gray Davis to win office in 2003).Mr. Shrum said he did not understand why Ms. Williamson was running.“It seems like a candidacy without much rationale,” he said. “Henry Waxman is doing everything he can to prevent the House Republicans from acting like crazy people, and I think folks know that.”With a redrawn, less Democratic district, Mr. Waxman may be more vulnerable than in years past, if only slightly. He faced his toughest re-election bid last year, when Bill Bloomfield, the co-founder of the bipartisan group No Labels, took 47 percent of the vote after spending millions of his own money to paint Mr. Waxman as a stubborn partisan who had spent too long in Washington.Ms. Williamson appears to be hoping to tap into that same anti-Washington sentiment, a popular tactic that cuts across ideological lines in a year when congressional approval ratings have fallen into single digits. (Brett Roske, who has also declared for the race, is also running as an independent.)She has presented her scant political experience as an asset, and at the bookstore last month, she played on her own mistrust of government. (“Look at Fukushima,” she said of Japan’s crippled nuclear plant. “Should we or should we not agree with the U.S. government that none of that radioactive energy is making its way here? Hello!”)“There is an insidious lockout,” she said. “Financial leverage determines political influence in a very disproportionate way. Looking to the political status quo to fix this situation, when the political status quo created this situation, is naïve at best.”Southern California voters have shown a willingness to give celebrity candidates a serious listen, though they are just as frequently the subject of lampooning.Mr. Schwarzenegger endured nonstop jokes about his role in the “Terminator” movies, but was able to capitalize on his fame and access to well-heeled donors.Acknowledging that she would need to raise millions of dollars to be competitive, Ms. Williamson has begun tapping her nationwide network of supporters, many of them in Hollywood. Jane Lynch, star of the television series “Glee,” is throwing a house party for the campaign.Still, Mr. Waxman’s last opponent, Mr. Bloomfield, who left the Republican Party to run as an independent, appealed not only to anti-Washington voters, but also to the conservative voters in this redrawn district.That is not a constituency likely to respond to Ms. Williamson, who is advocating free college, universal health care, universal preschool, gay marriage, an end to domestic nuclear energy production and “massive investment” in renewable energy.At the bookstore last month, one man in the crowd suggested, “You need new voters, I think.”Ms. Williamson disagreed. But when asked what constituencies her campaign might target, she said there were none. “The kind of politics that sees some voters as more important than other voters, that’s not why I’m doing this,” she said. “I’m speaking to the American in people.