SYDNEY, Australia — Fiji’s military government intends to discard a draft constitution unveiled last month by a renowned professor of constitutional law, a key component of measures intended to help return the coup-plagued nation to democracy ahead of elections set for late next year, the nation’s ruler has announced.The rejection of the proposed constitution in favor of one written by the government itself was announced Thursday during a nationally televised news conference by the military ruler, Commodore Josaia Voreqe Bainimarama, also known as Frank. Mr. Bainimarama promised that his government would deliver a fresh constitution within the next three weeks.The new constitution was drawn up by a commission headed by Yash Ghai, a respected Kenyan-born legal scholar.“The government’s legal team will amend the Ghai draft to ensure that the draft constitution presented to the constituent assembly is one that is positive, addresses fundamental issues of good governance, and will result in an enduring constitution and guarantees true democracy,” he said.Fiji, a former British colony made up of roughly 330 islands in the central Pacific Ocean, has been under military rule since a 2006 coup led by Mr. Bainimarama, the fourth in the country’s relatively short post-independence history.The government last year ended emergency regulations that had greatly expanded police powers, placed censors in newsrooms and curtailed the rights of nongovernmental organizations and religious organizations to hold meetings. Critics, however, say those measures were simply enshrined in even more draconian laws.Senior members of the military had recently complained of foreign meddling in the constitution-building process, presumably a reference to regional powerhouse Australia, which has a rocky relationship with Mr. Bainimarama and had partially financed the constitution’s drafting through its international aid organization, AusAID.The draft constitution, however, may have rankled some within the government because it sharply constrained the power of the military and required the formation of a transitional government ahead of the elections. Members of the junta would have received immunity from prosecution in exchange for apologizing for their actions, which may have been another stumbling block. In an interview last year in Fiji’s capital, Suva, Mr. Bainimarama repeatedly insisted that he had done nothing wrong by seizing power.Last month, the police seized hundreds of copies of the draft constitution and reportedly burned them in front of Professor Ghai. The commission had submitted its draft after reviewing more than 7,000 open submissions from the public.Since gaining independence from Britain in 1970, Fiji has been dominated by four military juntas. But the latest coup and subsequent crackdown isolated the island state, which is a member of the British-led Commonwealth of Nations. Australia and New Zealand have imposed unilateral sanctions, and the country’s membership in the Commonwealth was suspended in 2009.The announcement that the draft constitution had been rejected drew condemnation from Fiji’s neighbors. New Zealand quickly expressed concern over the move, which Foreign Minister Murray McCully told New Zealand Radio was “a backward step of some proportions.”Prime Minister Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi of neighboring Samoa was less diplomatic.“Most democratic countries know a lot more about constitutional processes than the inexperienced military gang in Suva,” he told The Australian newspaper.