Liberal and Democratic-leaning groups, facing difficult midterm elections next year without the technological muscle of the Obama campaign behind them, are preparing a major effort to improve their data infrastructure.George Soros, the retired hedge fund billionaire and longtime patron of liberal causes, will invest $2.5 million in the effort, officials involved with the plan said. His participation is a signal that some of the wealthy donors who arrived late to the Democrats’ “super PAC” efforts in 2012 are committing early for the next round.The initiative opens a new front in the “big data” arms race between the left and the right, as the Republican Party and conservative outside groups pour money into political technology after a presidential campaign in which they were badly outmatched.President Obama’s campaign spent tens of millions of dollars building a program to identify likely supporters and to motivate them with ads, social media efforts and get-out-the-vote messages. But the data experts and engineers who built Mr. Obama’s tech programs have largely moved into the private sector. And the president’s political organization faces an uncertain future: Reborn after Election Day as a tax-exempt advocacy group, it has struggled to translate Mr. Obama’s millions of supporters into an effective tool for advancing his agenda on issues like guns and immigration.More important, some Democrats said, is that they are unsure how big a role Mr. Obama’s organization can — or will — play in 2014. Those involved with the new effort say they are not waiting to find out. The initiative, as yet unnamed, will be based at Catalist, a for-profit cooperative founded in 2006 by Harold Ickes, a former aide to Hillary Rodham Clinton, and others.Details of the effort were presented this week at a Washington conference of the Democracy Alliance, a coalition of some of the country’s biggest liberal givers, which works to steer money and to coordinate political work among advocacy groups. Mr. Soros and other alliance donors were early investors in Catalist, and many of the groups funded by the alliance now buy data from it.On Thursday, boldfaced names of the Democratic donor world mingled at the Mandarin Oriental Hotel with rising Democratic stars like Wendy Davis, a contender for the Texas governor’s race, and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, who has been urged by some supporters to consider a presidential bid. Ms. Warren gave a speech touching on Republican efforts to filibuster Mr. Obama’s judicial nominees and the drive to bring intellectual diversity to the federal bench, attendees said, and was warmly received.“She’s been a darling here since the first time she came,” said Rob McKay, the alliance’s chairman.The conference will also feature the installation of Gara LaMarche, a veteran of liberal philanthropy, as the alliance’s new president. In an interview, Mr. LaMarche said the alliance hoped to expand its donor base and double its giving over the next several years, in part for a major new effort to expand the liberal political infrastructure at the state level, where conservatives and Republicans have won a series of political and policy victories.“There is a lot of feeling in this room that the states are where the focus should be,” Mr. LaMarche said.Improving Catalist was part of that drive, alliance officials said. The group serves as a kind of data hub for dozens of labor unions, liberal advocacy groups and super PACs, maintaining a shared national voter file that is continually updated with commercial and consumer data. Catalist was also involved in the governor’s election this month in Virginia and in the victorious mayoral campaign of Bill de Blasio in New York City.But the company is also jockeying with other Democratic-oriented data ventures, including some with roots in the Obama campaign, in a rapidly expanding sector that consumes an ever-larger chunk of campaign spending.Laura Quinn, the chief executive of Catalist, said in an interview that she was concerned that the Democrats’ data advantage would not last.“Jumping into the technology and data arena late is a recipe for failure,” Ms. Quinn said. “We want to continue to be successful in building data infrastructure and staying ahead of Republicans and conservatives.”Catalist and similar companies on the left also face an emerging network of competitors on the right. The Republican National Committee and its chairman, Reince Priebus, have committed substantial energy and money to bringing the party up to date, including opening an office in Silicon Valley. The sprawling network of donors and advocacy groups overseen by Charles and David Koch, the conservative philanthropists, have relied on a separate nonprofit group called Themis.The Catalist development effort will focus on moving liberal groups beyond the traditional tools of politics, like television advertising, direct mail solicitations and automated calls, and onto newer ones, including the use of social media, mobile devices and the kind of highly targeted cable advertising that the Obama campaign built last year.Michael Vachon, a spokesman for Mr. Soros, said Mr. Soros’s interest in the project was straightforward. “The smart use of data and analytics is essential to winning the political and policy battles that are important to liberals,” Mr. Vachon said.