New Yorkers may think of slavery as a Southern institution, but it thrived here in colonial times. And in “The Manor: Three Centuries at a Slave Plantation on Long Island” (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, $28), the landscape historian Mac Griswold tells the long story of a surviving slaveholders’ estate, hiding in plain sight on Shelter Island and occupied by the 11th generation of the family that settled it in 1651.Ms. Griswold happened on Sylvester Manor while canoeing off the shore of Shelter Island, the site’s longevity revealed by giant boxwoods that caught her discerning eye. She came to know the family and discovered that the property’s history was as well preserved — in thousands of documents — as its architecture and landscape.“By the time I finished writing about this Northern plantation,” says Ms. Griswold, “my bones had been rattled by the everydayness of slavery and its long legacy in our country.”A valuable scholarly companion volume is the anthropologist Katherine Howlett Hayes’s “Slavery Before Race: Europeans, Africans and Indians at Long Island’s Sylvester Manor Plantation, 1651-1884” (New York University Press, $30), based on her fieldwork at the site.●Summer is a fine occasion to revel in “Prospect Park: Olmsted & Vaux’s Brooklyn Masterpiece” (Princeton Architectural Press, $45), by David P. Colley and illustrated with lush photographs by Elizabeth Keegin Colley. This ode to a New York treasure explores the park’s origins and continuing restoration; unheralded philanthropists have donated equipment as mundane as a cherry picker and subsidized the hiring of pruners.As Adrian Benepe, the former city parks commissioner, writes in his introduction, this “rambunctious, bulging diamond” is Brooklyn’s heart and magnet. In many respects, it is more impressive than Central Park, its older sibling.Rather than being flanked by inescapable evidence of an urban environment, Mr. Benepe writes, “you truly feel as if you were in a vast English landscape designed by Capability Brown or in a deep woodland in the Adirondack Mountains.”And the park is more than a pretty refuge.As Mr. Colley writes: “Prospect Park realized its designers’ vision of the democratic ideal where people would mingle and socialize openly — and without reservation — with others from diverse backgrounds, cultures and socioeconomic levels. The day laborer would rub shoulders with the millionaire, and American democracy would be the better for it.”●If you love New York, you will love Alain Ducasse’s guide to his favorite haunts, culled from his personal culinary voyage through the city’s food universe.His “J’Aime New York: 150 Culinary Destinations for Food Lovers” (Alain Ducasse Books, $45) ranges widely as he generously celebrates colleagues and memorable meals in this delectable and richly illustrated travelogue designed for food lovers of every taste.The hefty 600-page, more-than-10-pound billet-doux is for the armchair, not the back pocket, but it comes with a handy removable guidebook to take on tour.From the original Shake Shack in Madison Square Park to Pommes Frites on Second Avenue, Saxelby Cheesemongers in Essex Street Market to Diner in Williamsburg, the French chef (he previously published “J’Aime Paris”) revels in “ ‘stumbling across’ objects, produce or unusual, novel ways of doing things.”