CAIRO — A car bomb destroyed about half of the French Embassy in Libya early Tuesday, officials said, in the most significant attack against a Western interest in the country since the killing last September of the American ambassador, J. Christopher Stevens.The explosion injured two French guards, one critically, but most employees had not yet arrived, Libyan and French officials said.The attack, in Tripoli, was a new blow to the transitional government’s hope of improving the sense of public security after the ouster of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi nearly two years ago. It was one of the largest in a string of attacks on diplomatic missions since the end of his rule, and the first major one in the capital.The French and Libyan governments labeled the explosion an act of terrorism, and the pattern of attacks on Western diplomatic missions indicated Islamist militants were responsible. Many Libyan militants have vowed to fight what they see as a foreign crusade to remake their country as a Western-style liberal democracy instead of an Islamic state. They resent the Western powers for their military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, to say nothing of the history of European colonialism in North Africa.Militants have expressed special anger at France, in Facebook posts and other forums, for its intervention in neighboring Mali, a former French colony. French troops landed there in January to help the government roll back a hard-line Islamist takeover, and the blast outside the embassy came just a day after the French Parliament voted to extend the deployment of those troops.That hostility may seem incongruous after Libyans praised France for its leading role in the Western air campaign that saved the Libyan insurrection. But even then, many Libyans suspected France and the other Western powers of intervening to seek oil or influence. And some Islamist militants further believe the Western powers sought to “seize the revolution” to “recreate Libya in a Western image of secular democracy,” said Prof. George Joffe, a Libya scholar at Cambridge University.The bomb went off just after 7 a.m. A Libyan official involved in investigating the crime scene said the blast had taken place when the shift of Libyan guards who stand outside was changing, avoiding Libyan casualties.The explosion broke the windows and damaged the facades of more than two dozen buildings over an area as wide as 500 yards. Plumes of smoke billowed from the burning wreckage of the car, described by the official as a Renault, parked by the embassy walls. A burst water main flooded the street.A nearby resident, who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals, compared the blast to the worst days of violence during the civil war in Iraq. “I lived in Baghdad, and I woke up to explosions as big as this one,” she said. “I was knocked out of bed.”As in other recent attacks in Libya, no one claimed responsibility. The Libyan government vowed “to cooperate with all parties to find the perpetrators and bring them to justice.”“The people and government categorically reject such acts,” the government said in a statement. It added, “They do not reflect the respect and appreciation that the Libyan people hold for the French Republic and the French people,” specifically recalling French support for the revolution.In Paris, President François Hollande said in a statement that the bombing had been “aimed, by way of France, at all the countries of the international community engaged in the struggle against terrorism.”He added, “France expects the Libyan authorities to shed the fullest light on this unacceptable act so that the perpetrators are identified and brought to justice.”Laurent Fabius, the French foreign minister, flew Tuesday to Tripoli, where he toured the site with Prime Minister Ali Zeidan of Libya. Mr. Fabius told reporters that Libya had pledged to punish the “terrorists” responsible for what he called the “cowardly” attack, according to news agencies.But pursuing the attackers may be difficult. The new Libyan government commands few disciplined police or military officers. Its forces often seem outmatched against the freewheeling militias formed during and after the uprising against Colonel Qaddafi. Indeed, it is sometimes hard to distinguish the autonomous militias from the loosely organized brigades nominally reporting to the government.The killing of Mr. Stevens, the ambassador, illustrates the problem: seven months later, little progress has been made to hold anyone to account.That failure received renewed attention in Washington on Tuesday when the Republican chairmen of five House committees released a report about the September attack, which took place in Benghazi. The report accused Hillary Rodham Clinton, then secretary of state, and other top officials of overriding requests for more security from American diplomats in Tripoli. Mrs. Clinton has said she tried to provide adequate security and does not recall requests for more.Benghazi is a Libyan hub of Islamist militancy, and attacks on diplomatic missions have been more common there. In June, armed fighters attacked the convoy of the British ambassador. And in January, militants tried to ambush the Italian consul.Last month, Libyan officials said they had arrested two men in the kidnapping near Benghazi of five British humanitarian activists, at least two of them women who were sexually assaulted.In the aftermath of the attacks, most Western diplomats have pulled out of Benghazi and retreated to Tripoli. But the attack on the French Embassy may raise new questions about security there as well.“Until very recently, everybody was pointing to the chaos and anarchy in Benghazi as the reason that an incident such as the attack on the U.S. Consulate there could take place,” said Claudia Gazzini, a Libya researcher for the International Crisis Group.“Now people are coming to grips with the fact that even in the capital, where you have the most presence of the state, that same kind of anarchy rules,” she said.