When the movement that became known as Occupy Wall Street took over Zuccotti Park in Lower Manhattan in September 2011, the next two months unfolded in a staccato of rallies, passionate appeals for more-direct democracy, marches that sometimes led to noisy confrontations with the police — and arrests.Students, housewives and tattooed train-hopping travelers slept under tarps, read books from the park’s library and passed the word in assemblies that began with the phrase “Mic check.” Food was donated; a comedy night was organized; Crosby, Stills and Nash performed; and celebrities like Russell Simmons and Alec Baldwin, as well as the philosophers Cornel West and Slavoj Zizek, went downtown to offer support.And Camille Rivera and Jonathan Westin fell in love.The couple, both organizers with left-leaning advocacy groups, had briefly met sometime before the protests, but it was during the movement’s heady, sometimes frantic mix of meetings and marches that they became close.  Ms. Rivera, the executive director of United NY, can pinpoint the moment when she became sure about her feelings for Mr. Westin.On Oct. 5, 2011, a labor march drew thousands of supporters to Zuccotti Park. That night, reeling with exhaustion and euphoria, Mr. Westin, who worked at New York Communities for Change, and Ms. Rivera drifted away from the crowds and began walking up Broadway toward City Hall. As they did, he took her hand in his.“I was feeling that this is the person I really want to be with,” Ms. Rivera said. “I had found a partner.”They had met the previous April when representatives of several organizations gathered to plan a campaign against city and state budget cuts. It was Jon Kest, Mr. Westin’s boss and a founder of the Working Families Party, who introduced them.Neither had been married, though both were raising families. Ms. Rivera, who grew up in the South Bronx, became a mother in her teens. Mr. Westin, who is partly of Samoan descent and grew up in St. Paul, had a young daughter.Mr. Westin, who is now 29, was immediately struck by Ms. Rivera, now 32. “She really caught my eye,” he said. “She was very beautiful.”But his admiration was not reciprocated: Ms. Rivera barely remembered him. They did cross paths over the next few months, and Mr. Kest introduced them yet again. Mr. Westin tried to use those encounters to establish something approaching a rapport with Ms. Rivera, but she had formed the impression, as she put it, that he was “kind of weird.”That began to change in summer 2011 during a conference call to plan a demonstration that August outside a Brooklyn food-processing plant that was closing. During the call, Mr. Westin offered a canny appraisal that was welcomed by the other organizers.“He’s really smart,” Ms. Rivera thought to herself, she said.As the demonstration outside the factory ended, she invited Mr. Westin out for a drink that night, planning to introduce him to a friend who had said she was interested in him. Mr. Westin arrived at a bar in Hell’s Kitchen, accompanied by his brother and his brother’s girlfriend, both visiting from Minnesota. He barely spoke with Ms. Rivera’s friend, and as the night progressed the reason became clear.“He doesn’t like me,” Ms. Rivera recalled her friend saying. “He likes you.”They had a few dates after that. Then that September, Occupy Wall Street started. Mr. Westin began going to Zuccotti Park and joining marches through the financial district. He sensed that this was a movement gathering momentum and tried to persuade Ms. Rivera to visit the park with him. She was busy planning other projects, including the Millionaires March to the Upper East Side apartment houses of some of the city’s richest people.The couple planned to meet for brunch on Oct. 1, a Saturday, but Mr. Westin wanted to take the temperature down at Zuccotti Park beforehand. A weekend earlier, a police commander had pepper-sprayed some women who were standing on a sidewalk during an Occupy march, and Mr. Westin found a rapidly growing crowd fueled by outrage over that episode.A couple of hours later he was one of nearly 1,000 people who marched onto the Brooklyn Bridge roadway. Mr. Westin retreated before the police surrounded the crowd with orange nets, but one of his friends was arrested, along with about 700 others.Brunch was canceled. Ms. Rivera and Mr. Westin spent much of the rest of the day trying to figure out where his friend was being held and awaiting his release.The next morning, Mr. Kest called Ms. Rivera and urged her to help with the organization of the Oct. 5 labor march. She plunged into the task, with Mr. Westin working up to 18 hours a day alongside her. They made telephone calls to unions, filled out paperwork for permits and coordinated with Occupy protesters.“It was an amazing time,” Ms. Rivera said. “We got very close.”The next weeks were long on meetings — at Zuccotti Park, in a public atrium at 60 Wall Street and at the United Federation of Teachers building on lower Broadway — and short on sleep.  As they recalled it, the days went by in a kaleidoscopic blur, and Ms. Rivera and Mr. Westin learned to depend on each other.“I fell in love with Jon because of his love for his family and how close he was to his culture and his compassion for people,” she said.Yotam Marom, a friend and fellow organizer, described them as “deeply committed to what was going on with Occupy.”“And it was fun watching them work together and get to know each other at the same time,” he said.The landmark moments of the movement also became milestones in the budding relationship. After Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg warned that the police would clear out Zuccotti Park on a morning in mid-October, Ms. Rivera and Mr. Westin were among a crowd of more than 1,000 people who surrounded the park at dawn and helped to stave off the eviction.And a month later, when hundreds of police officers arrived without warning after midnight to dismantle the encampment, the two rushed to Lower Manhattan in a taxi from Brooklyn. Two days later, thousands of people gathered for a rally in Foley Square and a march over the Brooklyn Bridge that they had helped to plan.The Occupy movement waned in the subsequent months, but the couple continued their advocacy work, with Mr. Westin replacing Mr. Kest, who died last December, as the executive director of New York Communities for Change. And the relationship between the two grew stronger. Ms. Rivera became pregnant, and he proposed last July 4 as fireworks burst over the Hudson.They were married on May 12 in Long Island City, Queens, before Bishop Orlando R. Findlayter of the United Covenant Churches of Christ at the Foundry, an industrial building reinvented as an event space. Ms. Rivera’s mother, Elizabeth Pacheco, read a poem by Pablo Neruda in Spanish. The couple’s 4-month-old daughter, Lucy Rose Westin, was there, along with her two half-siblings, Samantha Robles, 17, Ms. Rivera’s daughter; and Violet Westin, 4, Mr. Westin’s daughter.“I wish to possess the compassion you freely share with me,” Mr. Westin told Ms. Rivera. “You’re my partner in every way,” she replied.Later that evening, after the couple and their guests had made their way up to the roof of the old foundry, a voice shouted, “Mic check.” A message was passed, amplified and echoed Zuccotti Park-style: “Camille, Jonathan, we love you.”