I was in Mexico City in the summer of 1981, just out of high school, when Mexico’s president, José López Portillo, announced he would defend the peso “like a dog” against speculative attacks.His approach to economics was unorthodox but creative. He tried to raise oil prices by sheer force of will — firing the director of the state oil company Pemex for having the temerity to reduce the price of Mexican crude as oil plummeted on international markets. He froze dollar accounts in local banks to try to stem capital flight.But the canine defense didn’t work. In 1982, interest on foreign debt swallowed almost two-thirds of the country’s export revenue. In February, Mexico’s currency started plummeting. In August, Jesús Silva Herzog, Mexico’s finance minister, flew to Washington to tell Paul Volcker at the Federal Reserve and Donald Regan at the Treasury Department that Mexico could not make its coming payments to American and other foreign banks.Tweak a few of the details and Mexico in the 1980s looks a lot like most Southern European countries today. In Mexico’s case, runaway government spending in the 1970s, fueled by high oil prices and greased by foreign debt, threatened to bankrupt the country after the Fed sharply raised interest rates to curb rampant inflation in the United States, increasing Mexico’s interest payments even as oil prices crashed to earth.Similarly, money poured into Spain and Greece when investors persuaded themselves that the bonds of all members of the euro zone should be as safe as Germany’s, the region’s most creditworthy country. In Greece, this allowed a government spending binge. In Spain it ignited a housing bubble. Both countries were left with an unbearable burden when the world economy hit a wall, creditors took flight and the money stopped.European decision-making during the crisis of the last few years also shares some of the erratic nature of Mexican policy under President López Portillo. Cyprus was somehow allowed to threaten the euro area’s banking system. European leaders then “solved” the problem by imposing capital controls that — like those tried by Mexico — are unlikely to work and will undoubtedly provide new headaches down the road.But the most relevant parallel is one that European leaders refuse to see. If there is one overwhelming lesson from the debt crisis that struck Mexico and other Latin American countries so hard three decades ago, it is that countries that cannot grow will not pay. It is up to creditors, too, to allow them to grow. It took Mexico and its lenders seven years to figure that out. The European crisis is in its fifth year. You would think they might have learned something by now, but no.Mexicans remember what happened after Mr. Silva Herzog’s flight to Washington as the “lost decade.” Miguel de la Madrid, who took over as president the following December, promised deep budget cuts in exchange for bridge loans and debt rescheduling. That didn’t work, so Mexico cut a new deal, getting new loans from commercial banks, the United States and the International Monetary Fund, in exchange for cutting government payrolls and subsidies, selling state-run companies and opening the country to foreign trade.I started college a little before Mr. Silva Herzog’s trip. In the five-plus years it took me to get a degree (Mexican degrees take longer) the Mexican economy contracted about 2 percent. By the time I got my graduate degree two years later, gross domestic product per person was 8 percent less than it was in 1982. Yet despite the enforced austerity, Mexico’s foreign debt in 1988 still amounted to 56.5 percent of Mexico’s economic output, more than it had six years before.This must sound familiar to Europe’s unemployed. If anything it’s far worse there. The Greek economy has shrunk more than a fifth over the last five years. Government debt amounts to about 170 percent of the economy; it was 100 percent when the crisis started. The economies of Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Italy are smaller, too, than they were five years ago. Their debt burden is heavier. And still, European leaders insist that more of the same must be the solution.Charles Dallara — who earlier this year stepped down as the head of the Institute of International Finance, the lobbying group for multinational banks — despairs of the depth of austerity imposed on Europe’s debtor countries by its creditors in Berlin and Brussels.Having worked on Latin America’s debt problems at the Treasury Department and the International Monetary Fund throughout the 1980s, he has a keen sense of what did not work. “They do not understand the flaws in their approach,” he told me. “It is fraying the fabric of democracy.”But Latin America suggests there could be light at the end of the European debt tunnel, if only policy makers there could learn from previous experience.Mexico’s creditors performed a U-turn. Michel Camdessus, the head of the monetary fund then, became convinced that countries willing to continue economic reforms had to “count on a more adequate alleviation of the present drag of debt-service payments on their adjustment efforts.”Staring at the prospect of an imminent Mexican default that could have sunk some big American banks, Nicholas Brady, the newly minted Treasury secretary, prepared a plan for banks to reduce Mexico’s debts on a “voluntary” basis instead. “The problem was too much debt,” Mr. Brady told me. “The solution to too much debt is not more debt.”In 1990, the deal was concluded by the Mexican government of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari. Strong-armed by the Treasury Department and the monetary fund, banks swapped old Mexican debt for Brady bonds backed by United States Treasuries that offered a reduction in principal, below-market interest rates or new money. Mexico’s economy expanded by 4 percent, the strongest growth since 1981. The Brady plan became the template for debt reduction across Latin America and beyond.What can Europe learn from this experience? Proponents of austerity will probably note that the harsh years planted some of the seeds of Mexico’s recovery. Bankers will remark that Mexico’s absolute debt reduction package was small — much less than the 50 percent or so already granted to Greece. Economists will note that Mexico had a degree of freedom that no member of the euro area has: it could devalue its currency to gain export competitiveness.Nonetheless, the Brady plan was a crucial ingredient. It not only reduced Mexico’s interest costs, it also produced a jolt of confidence that pushed down domestic interest rates and buoyed the peso — reducing the burden of foreign debt. It prompted flight capital to return to the country and set off an investment boom.Yet perhaps the most important lesson to be had about the dynamics of economic crises and relief is about what it takes to motivate the political will to act.To some extent, we owe the Brady plan to the cold war. Political unrest simmered across Latin America. In 1988, Mexican voters almost ousted the party that had ruled the country since 1929. The region, Washington feared, risked falling into Soviet clutches. Arizona’s governor, Bruce Babbitt, even called Mexico “the ultimate domino.”Lt. Col. John C. Mangels, studying at the Air War College in 1988, caught the flavor of thinking at the time. “A financially devastated and chaotic Mexico would strongly interfere with our ability to maintain an East-West balance,” he wrote. “The long-term security threat from Mexico thus hinges on economics.”In a speech almost three years ago, Mr. Brady asked himself whether something like the Brady plan could work now. “I’m not sure,” he answered. “The level of cooperation I’ve described doesn’t happen by chance, or easily.”So far, Southern Europe’s 1930s-style depression has done little to sway Europe’s paymasters in Berlin. But the quagmire across the southern tier could rend Europe as deeply as the Iron Curtain divided East and West. Isn’t it time for another U-turn?