LEIPZIG, Germany —  It is a sign of the challenges facing the Social Democratic Party in Germany that when it celebrated its 150th anniversary on Thursday, the two guests of honor were a struggling foreign socialist leader, President François Hollande of France, and the socialists’ main domestic opponent, Chancellor Angela Merkel.The Social Democrats have a storied past — they were pioneers in inventing the European welfare state — but a cloudy future. The party trails Ms. Merkel’s center-right Christian Democratic Union in the polls with a general election coming in September. And its leading candidate has stumbled from one gaffe to another.One bitter pill for the Social Democrats is that Germany’s relatively painless weathering of the global economic downturn and Europe’s debt crisis was made possible by policies the party pushed through in 2003, at great cost in internal strife — but that it gets little or no credit from voters.Instead, Ms. Merkel rides high in popularity standings, and the Social Democrats are still struggling to recover from the split in their ranks and win back voters who broke with the party over the issue, saying it had betrayed its roots.Speaking to 1,600 invited guests from 80 countries on Thursday in the Gewandhaus concert hall in Leipzig, the city where the party was founded, Mr. Hollande praised the business-friendly measures the party pushed through under its chancellor, Gerhard Schröder, which were widely criticized at the time by the left wing of Mr. Hollande’s own party.“Progress is about making brave choices in difficult moments to maintain jobs, to anticipate changes in industry,” Mr. Hollande said. “That is what Gerhard Schröder did here in Germany that has allowed your country to be ahead of others.”Ms. Merkel sat in the front row at the event, but she did not give a speech. Neither did Peer Steinbrück, the Social Democrats’ candidate to replace her as chancellor in September.But Ms. Merkel did have complimentary words for the Social Democratic Party in a commentary published in the daily newspaper Leipziger Volkszeitung on Thursday, calling the party a “militant and unbending voice for democracy.”At its peak, the Social Democrats had more than a million enrolled members in Germany; now that is down to 474,480, and the party has been trailing Ms. Merkel’s Christian Democrats by more than 10 points in recent polls. But those polls also suggest that the governing coalition of the Christian Democrats and Free Democrats may not win a majority in Parliament, which may force the two main parties to team up in what is known as a grand coalition, an outcome neither party wants.To distinguish themselves in the campaign, the Social Democrats have focused on closing the gap between the wealthiest and weakest members of German society, which has widened in recent years, though it remains far less conspicuous than the wealth gaps in the United States or Britain. The party has called for introducing a minimum wage and raising taxes on Germany’s highest earners.Mr. Steinbrück has also tried to stem a drift of Social Democrat supporters to the Left Party by naming a union leader, Klaus Wiesehügel, as his candidate for labor minister.Observers say Ms. Merkel’s conservatives are vulnerable on social justice issues, noting a nepotism scandal plaguing the party’s Bavarian wing.“The S.P.D. has found the right way to win back voters,” said Jürgen Falter, a professor of politics at Mainz University. “Strategically it is the right choice.”Benjamin Plesch, a student of business and economics at Leipzig University who wandered over to the street fair hosted by the Social Democrats on Leipzig’s Market Square, agreed, saying he was drawn to the party’s push for a minimum wage. But like many Germans, he said it was still too early to say how he would vote in September.Though Thursday’s festivities were not a campaign event, Mr. Steinbrück told the crowd in a brief appearance at the street fair that his only birthday wish for his party was “that we win the general election — that is it, and that is enough.”People like Christa Glatza may pose the greatest obstacle to that wish. Though she would seem to be a natural supporter for the party — she has been unemployed for a long time, believes more should be done to create jobs and supports a minimum wage — she said she usually waits until just before an election to make up her mind, and in the past two elections, she has voted for the Christian Democrats. Why? “I really like Ms. Merkel,” she said.