BEIJING — For those accustomed to the partisan jousting that frequently paralyzes Washington, the feel-good unity displayed last week by the leaders of China’s eight so-called democratic parties was eye-opening.One after another, the men and women who head political organizations with names like the China Democratic League and the China Association for Promoting Democracy took turns extolling the nation’s economic progress, the leadership’s unswerving commitment to environmental protection and, above all, the perfection of single-party rule.“We will strive to construct a beautiful China, to contribute wisdom and strength for building a moderately prosperous society in all respects and achieve a new victory for socialism with Chinese characteristics,” Chen Zhu, chairman of the Chinese Peasants and Workers Democratic Party, said during a news conference. It coincided with the opening of the National People’s Congress, the annual gathering of 3,000 handpicked delegates who invariably approve the legislation put before them by the Communist Party leadership.Largely invisible much of the year, China’s non-Communist parties are thrust to the fore each March for a display of what the official news media calls China’s system of “multiparty cooperation and political consultation.”The news conference, held in a gilded meeting room in the Great Hall of the People, is an Orwellian affair, with party leaders referring to the wonders of “democratic centralization,” heaping praise on the Communist Party and then answering fawning questions from the state media.The parties, some created by Communist strategists during the civil war of the 1940s, bear little resemblance to political organizations elsewhere. For example, they cannot field candidates for public office. Their activities, which include banquets, conventions and the occasional overseas state visit, are wholly financed by the Communist Party.“They are fake parties, just a mirage created for the benefit of ordinary people, although most people are not fooled,” said Jin Zhong, editor in chief of Open Magazine, a Hong Kong political journal. “People who join them have a fantasy that they can influence the Communist Party.”Such sentiments are vehemently rejected by the organizations’ leaders, who say the system works just fine, providing the government with detailed proposals and measured advice from those outside the Communist Party. Asked whether he hoped China might one day embrace multiparty elections, Wan Exiang, chairman of the Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang, said such questions betrayed a Western fixation with electoral democracy.The Chinese people, he said, crave the growth and stability that have accompanied single-party rule — or at least the last three decades of relative placidity that followed the 30 years of social chaos and economic stagnation wrought by the Communist Party under Mao Zedong.“We once had more than 300 parties in the early stage of the Republic of China, and the consequences were rivalry among political parties and warlords, and national disintegration,” he said. “China could never have obtained such brilliant economic success today if we followed that kind of political system.”The parties are not entirely empty shells. They raise money for college scholarships, study social problems and issue detailed reports that are submitted to the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, the advisory body that meets alongside the National People’s Congress, which ends on Sunday. Recent proposals that party delegates have offered include a call to save historic wartime relics in Chongqing and a call to improve ophthalmological care for residents of China’s far west.Zhou Zhongxiao, 30, an executive at an online dating site in Beijing, said his participation in the China Democratic League had provided an outlet for promoting his pet project: the preservation of traditional wedding rituals. “We provide a useful service by helping the ruling party govern the country,” he said, adding with impatience, “Why does a party always have to be seeking political power?”Managed and financed by the Communist Party, the alternative parties are in some ways an ingenious attempt to neutralize would-be opponents among the educated urban elite while parrying critics who describe China as a single-party dictatorship. Like China’s state-run trade unions and officially sanctioned religious organizations, the parties are the handiwork of the United Front Work Department, the party apparatus that seeks to co-opt segments of society that could one day congeal into an organized opposition. Just to be safe, the Communist Party “lends” some of its members to the eight democratic parties. In recent years, those daring to try to establish truly independent political parties were promptly jailed on charges of subversion.Formed in the years before the Communists came to power, the parties fought against the Japanese and later sought a peaceful resolution to war between Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalist army and Mao’s rebels. When a victorious Mao called on the eight parties to join his inaugural consultative conference, they obliged, only to be swiftly subsumed by the Communist leadership.The arrangement has had its hiccups. In 1957, after Mao encouraged public criticism during his Hundred Flowers Campaign and then persecuted those who took the bait, the parties were viciously suppressed.Revived after Mao’s death in 1976, the parties have grown to more than 700,000 members, up from 170,000 in the mid-1980s. The Communist Party’s membership, by contrast, exceeds 80 million.Joining one of the democratic parties is not easy. Prospective members must be recommended by at least two current party members, but more important they must hail from the so-called intelligentsia — academics, scientists and artists — or China’s growing entrepreneurial class.In addition to providing the Communist Party with a vehicle for assimilating would-be adversaries, the parties give their members an ego boost, opportunities for career advancement and perhaps a chance to hobnob at the annual consultative congress in Beijing, said Joseph Cheng, a political scientist at the City University of Hong Kong. said Joseph Cheng, a political scientist at the City University of Hong Kong. “For a segment of the political elite that does not want to join the Communist Party, it can be an attractive way to get ahead,” he said. Many members agree. Wang Tongchun, 37, an advertising executive from the coastal Jiangsu Province, said his time as a member of the China Democratic National Construction Association had been a networking bonanza. “It gives you social status and a sense of belonging,” he said, all for dues of about $16 a year.Others have found the experience less fulfilling. Liu Ming, 33, a lawyer and self-described liberal dreamer from the city of Changsha in Hunan Province, said he wanted to get involved in politics but had avoided the Communist Party “because I wanted a clean conscience.” Still, he complained that membership in the China Association for Promoting Democracy had yet to provide any opportunities for advancing his passion for judicial reform. “I still feel like I’m a lone voice in the wilderness,” he said.