AUGUSTA, Ga.The ladies issue, as Billy Payne, the chairman of Augusta National Golf Club, described it, did not end last August with the admission of the club’s first two female members: Condoleezza Rice, the former United States secretary of state, and Darla Moore, a South Carolina financier.Their inclusion has been described as symbolic. It is not. It is significant, and here is why: the relationship-building qualities that make golf a popular hobby for many men are lost on a lot of high-powered businesswomen who have been too intimidated to give the game a try. Maybe if they see Rice, resplendent in her green jacket, showing guests around the clubhouse, as she has done during this tournament, white-collar women will feel welcome at their local courses.At an Executive Women’s Day conference organized by the PGA Tour during its tour stop outside Miami last month, it was startling to hear women who are competitive enough to pursue, and win, the corner office say they avoided golf for the reason that if they could not hit every shot perfectly, they did not want to hit any shot at all, lest they embarrass themselves.It was surprising to hear women who are fearless in the boardroom speak of golf with trepidation, as if they are trying to crash a secret society replete with a private language and strange rituals. At one session, women laughingly spoke of their first visit to a country club and how they thought a scramble was an item on the dining room breakfast menu. Or how they panicked when club employees took their bags because they thought they were stealing them. They had no idea the employees were delivering the bags to the practice area or the first tee.Women spoke of taking up the game out of professional desperation, because they were tired of losing clients to their colleagues who mixed poaching with pleasure on the golf course. In encouraging businesswomen to take up the game, Melody Lee, Cadillac’s global director for brand and reputation strategy, was blunt. “Golf is not a sport,” she said. “It’s a currency.”The women at the conference who play golf spoke of the priceless access they have to bosses or potential business partners who might not be able to arrange four minutes of face time with them at the office but whose rapt attention they have for the four or five hours it takes to play 18 holes.When men and women mingle on the golf course, everybody wins. In the mutual battle against the course and the elements, bonds are formed, barriers are broken and understandings are reached. What is beautiful about golf, aside from the scenery, is that the game fosters deeper connections. It is amazing how much one person can learn about another during several hours of battling awkward lies, shifting winds, bad bounces and errant swings.At the conference, one woman spoke of how empowering it was to see a titan of the corporate world hit an awful shot and realize, “Hey, he’s just like me.”Phil Mickelson, a three-time Masters champion, has known Rice for quite some time, he said. He described her as fascinating and intelligent and said she was “one of my favorite people to spend time with.”“She never disappoints,” Mickelson said. “She’s just a really special person.”If not for the pleasure of playing golf with Rice, would Mickelson know her as well? The more time you spend in a person’s company, the less one-dimensional she will seem. The hope here is that is what Payne meant when he said, in reference to Rice and Moore, “We are all looking forward to increasing our relationships with these wonderful ladies.”The participants in the 77th Masters have described delightful conversations with Rice, who outside the ropes was seen but not heard. In her 2010 memoir about her family, “Extraordinary, Ordinary People,” Rice addressed racial prejudice in a way that resonates in gender politics.Rice wrote: “No one can doubt that years of racial prejudice produced underrepresentation of minorities and women in all aspects of American life. Corporate boardrooms, management suites and elite university faculties and student bodies have for our entire history failed to reflect even roughly the ethnic mix of the country. That is not acceptable in America, which is the world’s greatest multiethnic democracy.”The ladies issue at the Masters matters because the more Rice and Moore roam among the old guard on the manicured grounds of Augusta National, the less the men whose company they keep there will be able to hold on to their tired stereotypes of women as dawdling golfers or boardroom party crashers or dull conversationalists. They will seem to them as they are: just like them.