BERN, Switzerland — On a recent afternoon in the old heart of this city, Jean-Daniel Gerber, the 67-year-old president of the Swiss Society for Public Good, was busy explaining to a room full of journalists the rules for a most unusual songwriting contest.Entries must have three verses that are easily singable in French, German, Italian, and Romansh, a language spoken by only about 60,000 people, mostly in southeastern Switzerland. The lyrics should be about such topics as democracy, fairness and “measuring the well-being of society by its weakest members.” Oh, and they must be “stylistically and artistically timeless,” with an emotional pull that will last centuries. The closing date for entries is June 30, 2014.“I don’t think that’s a lot to ask in six months,” Mr. Gerber said of the contest, which begins Jan. 1, 2014. “How long did Beethoven need for his symphonies?”But Mr. Gerber is not looking for a new symphony. He is searching for a new Swiss national anthem, or, at least, new words to the current one, the “Swiss Psalm.”Ever since it was adopted on a trial basis in 1961, the Psalm has been criticized by citizens and many politicians who say it is more suited to church services than soccer stadiums.It was written in 1841 when a Protestant poet, Leonhard Widmer, asked a Roman Catholic monk, Father Alberich Zwyssig, to set one of his efforts to music. It opens with, “When the morning skies grow red. … Thou, O Lord, appeareth in the sky,” and then riffs on such subjects as Swiss thunderstorms and God for four verses.Mr. Gerber insisted such subject matter is not suitable today, when at least a fifth of Swiss are atheists, according to the 2010 census.“The newspaper the Süddeutsche Zeitung recently said it’s more like a biblical weather forecast than an anthem and that is the best description I have heard,” he said.The last major political push for a new anthem came in 2004, when the socialist politician Margret Kiener Nellen proposed a motion calling for a new anthem, but without enough support it was withdrawn in 2006. A few years before, in 1998, the cigar company Villiger & Sons held a competition for a new anthem because its head, Heinrich Villiger, thought the Psalm was too old fashioned.Those efforts both failed, but Mr. Gerber hopes to be the one who finally succeeds. His effort started on Aug. 1, 2011, a national holiday celebrated at the Rütli, a meadow overlooking Lake Lucerne that many view as the cradle of Switzerland, where the nation was formed. He had asked everyone at the ceremony to stand for the anthem.“Let’s say I was happy no one sung the second verse,” he recalled. “I just thought, ‘My God, isn’t it possible to change this?”’He has been devising the competition ever since.Switzerland is not the first Western country to try to make its anthem more modern and inclusive. In 2012, Austria changed its anthem to mention its “great daughters” as well as its sons. This year, a “Restore Our Anthem” campaign was started in Toronto to try and make the Canadian anthem, “O Canada,” gender neutral.But Mr. Gerber is trying to achieve perhaps one of the biggest overhauls of an anthem ever attempted without a war being involved. (“If we waited for such an event in Switzerland, we’d be waiting forever,” he said.)It’s an unusual project for Mr. Gerber, a former executive director of the World Bank and former head of Switzerland’s State Secretariat for Economic Affairs who is now a board member of the bank Credit Suisse. But issues of Swiss identity are vital for him and he is a music lover.The society he leads, which was formed in 1810 to promote Swiss values and today does everything from govern the Rütli meadow to help the working poor, has set up a  website to promote the  contest. There is a prize of 10,000 Swiss francs, or $10,745, for the winner, who is to be announced in 2015. The Society has also established a 34-member jury, featuring politicians, musicians and critics, and it includes the president of the Swiss choirs association and the classical music specialist at Radio Télévision Suisse, a public broadcasting organization that still plays the anthem every day.Among the jurors is Oskar Freysinger, one of the country’s most controversial politicians. Mr. Freysinger, a member of the populist Swiss People’s Party, was instrumental in the success of a 2009 referendum leading to a ban on the construction of minarets in the country. But despite his traditionalist views, he said the Psalm is “a catastrophe.”“It’s so difficult, no one can get all the way through,” he said in a telephone interview. “And the tune, it’s not dynamic or original.”The issue of the new anthem’s content has stirred controversy on the jury.“I will fight against it if they try to make a new anthem politically correct,” Mr. Freysinger said. “It shouldn’t be a song talking about global warming or calling for the free passage of people. It’s not meant to be a New Age manifesto. I know they want a modern anthem, but anthems are above time.”But not all the jury members want a change. Philipp Wagner, a commander of military music in the Swiss Army, said the current anthem had been increasing in popularity lately thanks to the Swiss national soccer team’s success in international competitions and he could not understand why it needed to change.“It’s so simple — like the Swiss, I think,” he said. “We are four cultures and it’s really good to have something that’s easy to memorize by everyone.”He insisted that he still wanted to be involved and help choose a winner, though. “We’re the people who are most working with the anthem, so it’s important to be in the discussion,” he said.Although the competition does not open until Jan. 1, entries have already started to come in, including one from a 90-year-old former town clerk, one from a criminal lawyer, and one from a puppeteer and children’s songwriter who goes by the name Mister Dan.“The current anthem’s very poetic,” Mister Dan, whose real name is Pierre-Alain Hofmann, said by telelphone from his hometown of Granois. “But it’s like a dusty picture in a museum. It’s not going to get young people interested in the values of the land.”His entry promotes Switzerland as being “far from conflicts and wars,” and a “paradise” that its “proud and courageous” people will guard for eternity. He says he wrote it because he liked the challenge of fitting new words to an old tune. But is he really in it for fame? He laughed. “People can’t tell you who wrote the Psalm,” he said. “His name’s just in history books, not very important. But yes, I think I’d be happy if that happened to me, too.”