In their first face-to-face confrontation, Scott M. Stringer attacked Eliot Spitzer on Friday as a wealthy lawbreaker whom the voters should not trust with managing New York City’s money. Mr. Spitzer, in turn, described Mr. Stringer as a career politician who had accomplished little in his 20 years in elected office.The two Democratic candidates for city comptroller sparred over substance and personal style in the spirited hourlong debate, recorded for broadcast this weekend. Mr. Stringer accused Mr. Spitzer of spying on his enemies and clashing with allies, and Mr. Spitzer portrayed Mr. Stringer as a “go-along-to-get-along” member of the political establishment.Mr. Stringer, who when Mr. Spitzer first entered the race said that he would not talk about the prostitution scandal that led to Mr. Spitzer’s resignation as governor, raised that issue early and often, asserting that Mr. Spitzer had evaded responsibility for his actions because of his wealth and influence.“Right now there’s two tiers of justice in this city,” said Mr. Stringer, who is the Manhattan borough president. “There’s one for the rich and powerful, and there’s one for the rest of us. The truth of the matter is Eliot Spitzer represents the tier where he can escape prostitution — uh, prosecution.”There were several sharp exchanges. In response to a question about whether the comptroller should be the “sheriff” or “cheerleader” of Wall Street, Mr. Stringer said that the comptroller should be “the steward, a responsible manager of our pension system.”When it was his turn to speak, Mr. Spitzer said that the comptroller needed to be more than a “shepherd.”“Steward,” Mr. Stringer interrupted, wagging his index finger.Mr. Spitzer began to laugh.“Scott, I guess the simple question I would ask is, where were you?” he said, listing the investigations of Wall Street institutions that he conducted as attorney general in the years leading up to the financial crisis.“I credit you for the past but you’ve been on the sidelines for five years,” Mr. Stringer replied, adding, “Maybe you should go run for attorney general and lose to Eric Schneiderman.”Later, Mr. Spitzer spoke dismissively of Mr. Stringer’s 20 years in office, asking,"What indelible mark have you left on policy?”Mr. Stringer shot back that Mr. Spitzer had been “a colossal failure as governor.”In a preview of what is most likely going to be a major topic in the Democratic mayoral debates, Mr. Spitzer accused Mr. Stringer of “subverting democracy” by supporting the lifting of term limits that allowed Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg to run for a third term. (In 2008, Mr. Stringer testified in favor of lifting term limits before the City Council.)“Mr. Stringer was there to go along to get along, to give a third term, contrary to the will and wishes of the public, contrary to law, contrary to what democracy demanded,” Mr. Spitzer said.Asked later to respond, Mr. Stringer said he had always opposed term limits.“I don’t support term limits, never have, never will,” he said. “I’ve been consistent on that.”The debate was held at the Manhattan studios of WABC-TV, which co-sponsored it. It will be broadcast on Sunday morning.