The President and the PressTo the Editor:In his review of “The Bully Pulpit” (Nov. 17), Bill Keller suggests that Theodore Roosevelt, based on his dealings with writers from McClure’s magazine, had a positive relationship with the press for most of his presidency.Drawing that conclusion from Roosevelt’s interactions with this small group of writers would be akin to someone, 100 years from now, watching old MSNBC programs and assuming that Barack Obama was universally respected by the media.Throughout his presidency, Roosevelt had a contentious relationship with much of the press. He was frequently and harshly criticized not only by newspapers owned by Democrats like Joseph Pulitzer (as president, Roosevelt pushed to have Pulitzer indicted for libel) and William Randolph Hearst but also by some owned by reform-minded Republicans who felt he didn’t fight hard enough to end Republican machine rule in cities like Philadelphia.STEVEN A. KINGNEW YORK◆Who Wrote the Bluebook?To the Editor:“The Bluebook” is the iconic citation manual that dominates legal writing. Kenji Yoshino reviews Richard A. Posner’s book “Reflections on Judging” (Nov. 10), which notes that the Bluebook was created by the future judge Henry Friendly or the future Harvard dean Erwin Griswold when they were students at Harvard Law School in 1926.The Yale Law Library, however, has in its rare-book collection a pamphlet titled “Abbreviations and Form of Citation,” issued by The Yale Law Journal in 1921; our copy appears to be the only one in existence. A comparison of the 1921 Yale pamphlet with the 1926 first edition of the Bluebook shows that the Bluebook took most of its content, often word for word, from Yale’s product. Some may say that originating the ­hypercomplicated Bluebook should not be a source of pride, but The Yale Law Journal ur-Bluebook consisted of only 15 tiny pages. The version that has developed under the leadership of the Harvard Law Review currently consists of over 500 large pages, and users may need software such as the pioneering CorrectCite to help them navigate its mysteries.FRED SHAPIRONEW HAVENThe writer is an associate librarian and a lecturer in legal research at Yale Law School.◆Not His Last WordTo the Editor:The question of what Aldous Huxley would make of the way we consume media and popular culture today (Bookends, Nov. 10) is one to which Huxley himself repeatedly returned. He hardly wished “Brave New World” to be his last word on the subject. In 1958, he began “Brave New World Revisited” by indicating that his prophecies were coming true much sooner than he had expected 26 years earlier: “In the West, it is true, individual men and women still enjoy a large measure of freedom. But even in those countries that have a tradition of democratic government, this freedom and even the desire for this freedom seem to be on the wane.”Huxley’s last novel, “Island” (1962), was meant, according to his son, Matthew Huxley, to be “what ‘Brave New World’ should have been and wasn’t.” The novel portrays a community founded in the hope that drugs, wisely administered, would contribute to collective happiness and social cooperation. Alas, fulfilling that wish for happiness left citizens blissfully unprepared to meet the inevitable threats from the outside; a final takeover destroyed all that the founders had hoped for.SISSELA BOKCAMBRIDGE, MASS.◆Colonists and IslamTo the Editor:Kirk Davis Swinehart’s review of “Thomas Jefferson’s Qur’an,” by Denise A. Spellberg, praises the book for showing that Jefferson’s reading of the Quran in 1765 led him “to include Muslims in his expansive vision of American citizenship.” That ignores the way Islam was discussed during the colonial period, particularly by the earliest proponents of religious freedom as a metaphor for the universality of their principle. For example, the Flushing Remonstrance, written in 1657 as a defense of Quakers against attacks by the New Amsterdam governor Peter Stuyvesant, declared that the “law of love, peace and liberty” extends “to Jews, Turks and Egyptians, as they are considered sons of Adam.” Similarly, Benjamin Franklin described a building he helped finance for the preacher George Whitefield in the 1740s that was intended for use by all religions: “The design in building not being to accommodate any particular sect, but the inhabitants in general; so that even if the Mufti of Constantinople were to send a missionary to preach Mohammedanism to us, he would find a pulpit at his service.”Jefferson’s reading of the Quran was part of his education, but it certainly did not “account for his most enduring contributions to liberal democracy.”MICHAEL MEYERSONBALTIMOREThe writer, a professor of law at the University of Baltimore School of Law, is the author of “Endowed by Our Creator: The Birth of Religious Freedom in America.”