BANGKOK — Representatives of Thailand’s governing party slipped past a cordon of protesters Monday to register for the coming election, infuriating the party’s detractors, who have vowed to suspend democracy until “reforms” are carried out.In a signal that Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra will most likely return as prime minister if the party wins another majority in the Feb. 2 elections, the governing party put her at the top of its electoral list. Ms. Yingluck has faced a month of debilitating street protests in Bangkok, and she and her brother, the billionaire Thaksin Shinawatra, are the main targets of the protesters’ ire. Her selection as the party’s leading candidate is likely to inflame antigovernment sentiment.The scene around the party registration site in Bangkok on Monday seemed a microcosm of the country’s political standoff. Ms. Yingluck’s party and other, smaller parties are eager to contest the election and put a monthlong political crisis behind them. But protesters and their allies in the Democrat Party, the main opposition party, say the country must undergo reforms, largely unspecified, before any elections are held.Although tampering with the electoral process is a criminal offense in Thailand, the protesters have largely acted with impunity. The government has said it will not use force against protesters for fear of aggravating an already tense situation.By early Monday, the registration site, a sports facility in Bangkok, was ringed by protesters who said they would block party representatives and would-be candidates for Parliament. One demonstrator held a sign that said, “If you really want to be an MP, you’ll have to climb over our heads.”But representatives from a number of parties had slipped into the facility in the hours before dawn.By late afternoon, the country’s Election Commission announced that 35 political parties had filed to take part in the elections; nine parties successfully submitted applications at the registration site, and 26 other parties, blocked by the protesters, gave notice of their intent at a nearby police station. Protesters cut the police station’s water and electricity supplies.It appeared that all parties currently represented in Parliament were prepared to contest the elections except the Democrats.Although the protesters are a diverse group that includes many affluent and middle-class Bangkok residents, the protest leader, Suthep Thaugsuban, is from southern Thailand, as are many of his most devoted followers who sleep on the streets and have taken over government buildings in recent weeks.The country’s regional polarization — the north and the northeast overwhelmingly support Ms. Yingluck’s government, and the south fiercely opposes it — has been a key undercurrent of the protests. Protesters from southern Thailand feel they have been neglected by the government; they have been offended by statements from government officials that the south will not receive government projects and largess until they swing to the governing party’s side.“If you have five children, you have to love and treat all of them equally,” said Soy Panthong, 55, a construction worker from a southern province, Nakhon Si Thammarat.A successful boycott of the elections in the southern provinces could prevent Parliament from reaching minimal requirements for attendance and block the formation of another government.“I don’t think there will be any elections in the southern provinces,” said a protester, Anand Toewbutr, 43, who owns a palm oil plantation in southern Thailand. “If the election does take place, we will close all the voting booths.”Officials from the Election Commission and members of the governing party said they were pressing ahead with elections.“We have to manage this conflict in the Parliament,” Charupong Ruangsuwan, the leader of the governing party, Pheu Thai, said on television Monday. “Let the people decide who will run the country.”Mr. Charupong, confident of victory, announced that his party planned “to reform the country for one year” and then call fresh elections.Mr. Suthep, the protest leader, has proposed a plan in which an unelected “people’s council” would carry out reforms before any election is held.“We want to reform the country before the election,” he told his supporters Sunday night, “because we don’t want this election under current conditions and current electoral laws.” Holding an election now, he said, would produce “the same old government, same old corruption.”In a sign of the heated tensions — and the troubling prospect that protests could devolve into violence, as they did in the capital in 2010 — Mr. Suthep said protesters would continue to target Ms. Yingluck.“We will continue driving her out until she is dead or she leaves,” he said.