FRONT PAGEA picture caption on Friday with the continuation of an article about holiday bargains aimed at shoppers themselves, not as gifts, rendered incorrectly the name of town in North Carolina. It is Nags Head, not Nag’s Head. The article also misspelled the website of a subscription fashion business. It is RueLaLa.com, not RuLaLa.com.INTERNATIONALAn article last Monday about disputed results in the Honduran presidential election misstated the source of financing for the National Democratic Institute, an American organization that promotes democracy abroad and that observed the election. It is financed by United States government agencies and other sources, but not by the Democratic Party.NATIONALBecause of an editing error, a picture caption on Wednesday with an article about Comet ISON’s close approach to the sun misstated the direction the comet’s tail was pointing. It pointed away from the sun, not toward it.•An article on Nov. 22 described incorrectly a comment President Woodrow Wilson made about his frustrations with Senate filibusters in 1917. In discussing preparations to enter World War I, he described some senators who opposed his plans as “a little group of willful men.” He was not referring to the entire Senate.•An article on Nov. 23 about a policy of the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology that prohibited its members from treating most male patients misstated the title of Dr. Douglas R. Lowy. He is a deputy director of the National Cancer Institute, not a deputy director of the Center for Cancer Research at the National Cancer Institute. The article also omitted a source of money for a coming clinical trial aimed at preventing anal cancer. The $5.6 million will come from both the National Cancer Institute and the Office of AIDS Research at the National Institutes of Health, not just the National Cancer Institute.BUSINESS DAYAn article on Tuesday about Chrysler’s postponement of its initial public offering misstated the arrangement by which the United Automobile Workers’ health care trust owns 41.5 percent of the carmaker. It is a voluntary employees’ beneficiary association, or VEBA. It is not formally named Voluntary Employee Beneficiaries Association.THE ARTSBecause of an editing error, a picture caption on Nov. 21 with an article about the complicated development of the musical “Fun Home,” currently at the Public Theater in Manhattan, misidentified the site of the Sundance Theater Lab where Lisa Kron, who wrote the book and lyrics, and Jeanine Tesori, who composed the music, were shown. It was in Utah, not Florida. The picture also carried an erroneous credit. It is by Marina McClure, not Beth Malone. The article referred incorrectly to the song “Ring of Keys” in the show. The character Alison sings about her fascination with a restaurant delivery woman, not a waitress.OBITUARIESAn obituary on Thursday about the photographer Saul Leiter misstated the year of one of his works, “Red Umbrella.” It is 1957, not 1967.•An obituary on Nov. 7 about the journalist and political activist Doug Ireland erroneously credited him with an accomplishment. He did not manage Paul O’Dwyer’s successful 1973 campaign for president of the New York City Council.•An obituary on Tuesday about the Rev. T.J. Jemison, a civil rights leader who organized a bus boycott in Baton Rouge, La., misstated the year the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. contacted Mr. Jemison for advice on managing a bus boycott. It was 1955, not 1954.The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.