Jack Cahn maintains an A average at one of the country’s best high schools. He speaks three languages and is learning a fourth. He writes for a Huffington Post blog, is a highly ranked debater and, he says, had three girls ask him to prom this year.But what he wants most right now, and at the moment cannot have, is the presidency of the Student Union in his senior year at Stuyvesant High School.Mr. Cahn, 17, was elected president this month, but the school’s Board of Elections immediately disqualified him for what it said was a series of violations during the campaign. Mr. Cahn, however, is fighting to overturn the decision.“Democracy should prevail,” Mr. Cahn said, noting that he won by 118 votes, a 57 percent to 43 percent victory. “Students call me every night, asking me to keep fighting. They’ve compared this to China, Russia, Venezuela.”While not Bush v. Gore, the fight over the election results has become a minor obsession in the final days of the school year at Stuyvesant. The Board of Elections, which is made up of 19 students and is overseen by a faculty member, gave Mr. Cahn three strikes that led to his disqualification. The first was for leaving campaign material inside the Student Union room. The second was for putting up more than three posters on a single bulletin board.The third strike, which the board announced alongside the disqualification, is among the things that distinguish the student elections from the current race to fill the mayor’s office, which is just a few blocks away. In an attempt to rally the support of junior and senior caucus candidates, Mr. Cahn wrote to them, saying that his opponent, Edward Zilberbrand, “accomplished very little” during his time in student government. That broke the rule that candidates “shall not put down any other candidates.”What some students have been quick to write off as a closed case has evolved into a full-scale mission by Mr. Cahn to overturn the ruling.Mr. Cahn, whose predicament has been reported on the gothamschools.org education blog, has argued that the board did not have the authority to disqualify him, and has accused its executive committee of denying him the right to be heard before the decision was made.He has contested all three strikes, saying that the rules on the use of Student Union resources were unclear; that anyone could have overloaded the bulletin board, and that in any case, it was not he; and that his comment on his opponent was made in private messages and was essentially what had already been published in the Spectator, the student newspaper, when it endorsed Mr. Cahn. Referring to Mr. Zilberbrand, it said that “during a presentation to the Editorial Board, he admitted he could have accomplished more in the SU.”Sitting in a park outside the school, Mr. Cahn said: “It’s my obligation toward those who supported me to keep standing up for what’s right. The reason people don’t vote is because they’re disenchanted by the system.”The board has rejected Mr. Cahn’s arguments, responding in a letter that the violations represented “an unprecedented event in which a candidate so willingly chose to bend and twist the rules and regulations to gain an unfair advantage.” In an e-mail, Su Rho Yoo, one of the chairmen of the Board of Elections, said he believed that the actions taken by the board were just, but recognized the need to “solidify the rules and regulations for the upcoming school year.”Part of Mr. Cahn’s effort has been manifested in a petition on change.org to overturn the decision. On Sunday night, it had received more than 350 signatures, a number that Mr. Cahn points out exceeds the number of votes his opponent received in the election.But Mr. Cahn’s persistence has generated mixed reactions among students.“It’s very melodramatic and unnecessary,” said Andrew Guo, 16, as he walked into school to take a final exam last week. “I’m surprised so many people even care.”Ben Attal, 16, said that Mr. Cahn’s boldness may have been part of the reason the board disqualified him. “When he has a goal, he acts very aggressively to achieve it,” Mr. Attal said. “But ultimately more people voted for him, and he deserves to win.”Mr. Cahn still has a strong following. “Bring on the Jack Cahn force,” said another student, Victoria Greene, 17, as she passed him in the hallway last week. “I know you can do it. I believe in you.”Mr. Cahn carries himself with confidence. He speaks English, Hebrew and Spanish, and is studying Chinese. Along with working internships, he runs a small summer business with his identical twin, David, selling advertising space on coffee carts around New York City. David Cahn also attends Stuyvesant and is co-editor in chief of the Spectator. (He recused himself from the endorsement.)In a column published in the Spectator and on the Huffington Post, Jack Cahn criticized a proposal by school administrators to place restrictions on students’ course loads as a way to stop them from putting too much stress on themselves. He said it would reduce students’ opportunities.“I came to Stuyvesant to be sleep-deprived, I came here to be pressured, I came here so that I would have enough work to keep me up throughout the night,” Mr. Cahn wrote.So far, the board has declined to overturn its decision. But Mr. Zilberbrand has offered a way to bypass the tempest, by offering to share the title of president with him.As Mr. Yoo, who goes by the name Kevin, walked by one day last week, Mr. Cahn called out, “Hey, Kevin!”“What do you think of the idea of co-presidents?”Mr. Yoo responded, “I’ll have to think about it.”