According to SAC Capital Advisors, the wildly successful hedge fund now accused of systematic crime, the firm not only has “a strong culture of compliance” intended to “deter insider trading,” as the firm put it recently, but may also have one of the most rigorous and “cutting edge” hedge fund compliance programs in the country.The firm said it spends “tens of millions of dollars,” on compliance, “deploys some of the most aggressive communications and trading surveillance in the hedge fund industry,” has hired big-name lawyers like Peter Nussbaum and Steven Kessler to oversee compliance, and has a staff of “no fewer than 38 full-time compliance personnel.”Which sets up the question: What were they doing?On Thursday, the federal government charged SAC with running an insider-trading scheme that flourished from 1999 to 2010, the result of an “institutional indifference” to unlawful conduct. On the face of it, it’s impossible to reconcile SAC’s avowed devotion to both legal and ethical behavior and the government’s allegations.It may be true, as SAC concedes, that even the best compliance programs “may not detect individuals determined to evade firm policies or break the law.” But that doesn’t explain the insider trading “on a scale without known precedent in the hedge fund industry,” as the government put it, which already includes guilty pleas by five employees, insider trading indictments of two more, and SAC’s own settlement of Securities and Exchange Commission charges for $616 million, the largest insider trading penalty ever.Whether the elaborate compliance system at SAC was little more than a Potemkin village will be at the center of both the S.E.C.’s civil enforcement against Steven A. Cohen, SAC’s eponymous billionaire founder, for failure to supervise his employees, and this week’s criminal indictment against the firm. (Mr. Cohen hasn’t been charged with any crime.) As Harvey Pitt, the former S.E.C. chairman, told me this week: “When it comes to compliance, you have to live, eat, breathe and drink it. It has to be embedded in a firm’s DNA.” And that process, he emphasized, had to start at the top, with Mr. Cohen.SAC maintains that’s exactly what both the firm and Mr. Cohen have strived for, and that “Mr. Cohen himself exemplified” that “compliance is the responsibility of all of its employees.”Such an effort, SAC said, began with its hiring process. The “firm does not take lightly its decision to employ someone,” it said in a document responding to an S.E.C. action last week contending that Mr. Cohen failed to supervise SAC’s employees. The firm said it refused to hire candidates because of concerns about compliance issues. When I asked for an example, the firm declined to identify any.But the government cited multiple examples of SAC employees who were hired precisely because of their purported “contacts,” including one who “has a share house in the Hamptons with the C.F.O.,” or chief financial officer, of a publicly traded company and is “tight with management” at the company, as one internal SAC e-mail enthused. Another prospect was praised for “mining his industry contact network for datapoints.” The government said SAC rarely, if ever, showed any interest in ethics, integrity or compliance in vetting candidates.On the contrary, when SAC’s legal department raised objections to hiring Richard Lee after another hedge fund warned that he was part of an “insider trading group,” Mr. Cohen “decided to hire Mr. Lee anyway,” and overruled the legal department, the indictment contends. Mr. Lee began insider trading almost as soon as he was hired. (Mr. Lee pleaded guilty this week to conspiracy and securities fraud charges and is cooperating with the government’s investigation.)SAC has also stressed its continuing training programs, which include requiring employees to certify their adherence to a compliance manual and attend sessions with “prominent outside speakers.” These included Mr. Pitt, who is now chief executive of Kalorama Partners, a consulting firm that advises clients on compliance issues; and Stephen Cutler, a former chief of enforcement at the S.E.C. who is now general counsel at JPMorgan Chase, who spoke to the employees while in private practice. Mr. Cohen himself was “an active participant in this process,” SAC said.But not all that active, apparently. Mr. Cohen didn’t bother to attend all the lectures, according to participants, although he did meet with the speakers individually.SAC refused my request for a copy of the compliance manual employees were required to read, but Mr. Cohen himself doesn’t seem to have taken it all that seriously. “I’ve read the compliance manual, but I don’t remember exactly what it says,” he said in a 2011 deposition in a civil case. The firm’s lectures notwithstanding, he also said in the deposition that the law on insider trading was “very vague.”The training seems only to have alerted some employees to the type of activity they needed to conceal — not to stop it. One new SAC employee, in an instant message to Mr. Cohen conveying information about Nokia, said he’d just gotten a lecture from SAC’s head of compliance, “So I won’t be saying much,” he wrote. “Too scary.” The government noted that this didn’t prompt any reaction from Mr. Cohen.Testimony that a former SAC employee, Noah Freeman, gave in another insider trading case suggested that some SAC employees were adept at evading compliance efforts. They seem to have routinely used private e-mails and kept notes on encrypted drives “so that in the event of a subpoena or government investigation, there wouldn’t be notes on the central corporate servers that the government could get their — hold of,” Mr. Freeman testified.Mr. Freeman paid his sources through trading commissions to disguise the fact that he was using expert networks to talk directly to employees of public companies, which SAC’s compliance department had banned. Asked if he’d told other SAC employees about this tactic, Mr. Freeman said he told another SAC portfolio manager “because he was thinking about doing the same thing,” adding, “I wanted him to understand the system, so he wouldn’t screw it up.”SAC maintains that “to deter and detect insider trading in potential violation of law and firm policy, it engages in two separate forms of surveillance at enormous cost: review of electronic communications and review of trading using “keyword and concept-based search techniques.” Apparently, those keywords didn’t include “edge,” a common euphemism for inside information (“I hate that word,” Mr. Cohen said in his 2011 deposition). “Edge” appears 14 times in the government’s indictment and crops up in suspicious SAC e-mails. “My edge is contacts at the company,” one employee, Jon Horvath, told Mr. Cohen in an e-mail. Another, Mathew Martoma, sent Mr. Cohen an instant message saying he had “a better edge” about a pharmaceutical company. Neither message seems to have troubled Mr. Cohen. Mr. Horvath pleaded guilty last year to insider trading, while Mr. Martoma has been charged and pleaded not guilty.SAC’s strongest evidence of Mr. Cohen’s commitment to lawful behavior may be a case that Mr. Cohen, to his credit, did send to compliance, apparently on his own initiative. It was one of “dozens of communications” Mr. Cohen flagged as problematic, according to SAC. In this instance, the firm’s chief compliance officer “told the individuals to unwind the trade,” and the firm “imposed significant financial penalties” even though “the evidence was insufficient to show that the conduct violated the insider trading laws.” SAC declined to identify the individuals, the trades involved or the amount of any financial penalty.The government said that the company was Medicis Inc., a health care company, and that SAC employees took a short position in the company’s shares, betting they would fall. After Mr. Cohen asked about the trading, SAC’s compliance department concluded that the SAC employees involved had gotten advance word of a negative research report from a Wall Street analyst, according to the indictment, and thus might have been insider trading.This could have been an important teaching moment for Mr. Cohen to drive home to the rest of his employees that SAC had zero tolerance for unethical or potentially illegal trading. Instead, “the consequences were limited,” the government said. The employees “were allowed to keep their jobs” and SAC “failed to report the insider trading to any regulatory or law enforcement personnel.”SAC wouldn’t name any other of the dozens of matters referred by Mr. Cohen to compliance. But according to the government, there was little danger that any of them would result in meaningful sanctions or send any message to the rest of the firm: “The limited number of internal investigations by the SAC compliance department of insider trading were generally weak, with a focus on ‘confirming’ ” that suspicious communications were innocent, the government asserted. Indeed, despite the spate of insider trading going on at the firm, the Medicis trading was the only time the compliance department identified any suspected insider trading in the firm’s history, the government said.Whatever else might be said about SAC’s compliance program, the bottom line is that it failed. Whether that failure can be attributed to Mr. Cohen or his top compliance officials remains to be seen. But Mr. Pitt, for one, came away from his visit to the firm unimpressed. “My sense was that it was a check-the-box mentality, not a serious commitment,” Mr. Pitt told me.He added that you can’t judge a firm’s culture and ethics by appearances. “If you read the Constitution of the old Soviet Union, you’d think it was a perfect democracy,” he said. “In fact, it was a totalitarian state.”