PARMA, Italy — The Five Star Movement of Beppe Grillo, the comedian turned political insurrectionist, won municipal elections a year ago in this small northern city by campaigning on a platform of change, transparency and popular participation in decision-making, much as it had elsewhere in Italy.But all politics being local, the movement ran mostly on a pledge to stop construction of an incinerator. ‘’It will be built over the mayor’s dead body,” Mr. Grillo said at one rally with his characteristic mix of bombast and belligerence.The incinerator began operating late last month.In ordinary circumstances, broken campaign promises might be given grudging latitude by the public, the track record of Italy’s politicians being what it is. But Parma is the first major city whose administration is being run by the Five Star Movement, which has presented itself as a nearly revolutionary alternative to a political system it dismisses as ossified and out of touch.After its victory here, the movement went on to win 25 percent of the vote in national elections in February, making it the most potent threat to Italy’s traditional political parties in years. As Five Star accumulates power, Parma is now being scrutinized as a test of what the movement would do if given still more authority.So far, the prototype here has come in for decidedly mixed reviews as the movement’s lofty ambitions bump up against tough economic reality.The movement had also pledged to lower a loathed property tax. That promise was broken, too, as the new City Council found itself faced with a billion-dollar debt, the legacy of previous center-right governments. The City Council has raised fees for municipal day care centers and the price of school lunches.This from a movement that has ritually hammered the austerity measures that Italian politicians have put in place at a national level.‘’Reality has contained them,” said Marco Severo, a reporter in Parma who wrote a book on the movement’s first year of governing the city. ‘’They made the decision that they had to put the city budget in order. A decision dictated by good sense, perhaps, but by raising taxes they’re making a political choice. It’s not just a technical necessity.”He added, ‘’We’re seeing the contradictions of a movement as it becomes institutionalized.”Such steps have divided Parma residents. Some say the mayor, Federico Pizzarotti, a political neophyte, has alienated a vocal segment of citizens who feel that the movement has not lived up to its ideals. Others say he and his crew have done the best they could in a challenging economic climate.Camillo Conte, the owner of a tobacco shop, was sympathetic.‘’Parma was crippled by huge debts, so their hands have been tied,” he said.Given that the movement will run only candidates with no prior political affiliation, the candidates’ lack of experience is understandable and a steep learning curve inevitable, Mr. Conte said. Still, he added, ‘’they were rather cocky when it came to electoral promises.”In an interview, Mr. Pizzarotti acknowledged that he and Five Star were ‘’under a magnifying glass.” A principal challenge, he said, has been to get Parma’s population of 180,000 to better understand what the movement is about, and to get involved.‘’We have to show society how we move, and so we are a lightning rod for criticism,” he said. ‘’But we want to give a message of action. We are pioneers of something that can grow and improve, and Parma is the starting place.”So far, the results of direct citizen participation have been less than movement officials had hoped. Town-hall-style meetings, held neighborhood by neighborhood, attract few residents and tend to bog down on minor issues, Mr. Pizzarotti said.He and his council members have been trying to teach by example. Bicycles have replaced chauffeured luxury cars. The leadership took a cut in pay — and trimmed the salaries of municipal employees, to their chagrin and protests — shaming other local administrations into doing the same. They have taken aim at what they consider excess spending, but a sober white municipal Christmas tree made of Styrofoam and recycled cardboard did not go over well in Parma, which takes pride in its renown as a rich, somewhat vain, city.Shopkeepers say that councilors are more accessible than before; they now use Facebook and Twitter to keep citizens apprised of their decisions. Council meetings can also be viewed online.But the jury is still out on an Internet-driven movement that aims to circumvent the existing political process by allowing citizens to vote on programs and positions through online forums.Many question the transparency of Five Star’s system, and its democratic credentials.‘’Direct democracy does not exist; there is no revolution happening in Parma,” said Vincenzo Bernazzoli, the president of Parma Province, who lost to Mr. Pizzarotti in the mayoral runoff election. ‘’For now the honeymoon continues, but the contradictions will serve as the final judge on the revolution.”For critics of Mr. Pizzarotti, the honeymoon is already over.A group of citizens who want the mayor to take a more critical look at the debts accrued by his predecessors, as well as several questionable financial and real estate dealings, accuse him of ignoring their concerns and refusing to meet with them.Despite the Five Star Movement’s pledge of greater participation, it has also yet to fulfill a promise to devote 5 percent of the city budget to projects decided on by the populace.The town-hall-style meetings have drawn snickers from some participants because a psychologist was called in to moderate the proceedings. Others have dismissed them as collective condominium meetings. Then there are those disappointed that the movement has not spearheaded civil liberties.‘’They haven’t addressed same-sex civil unions, which any administration that labels itself as progressive should do,” said Antonello Saiz, a Parma book dealer. ‘’They campaigned by appealing to populist slogans, but then in practical terms they’ve done little to deal with the real needs of people. Populism is not what the country, or the city, wants.”Mr. Pizzarotti, the mayor, acknowledged the grumbling but countered that his hands were tied by budgetary constraints, bureaucratic hoops, administrative regulations and the negative economic circumstances — the same obstacles that abound all over Italy.‘’We had to be realistic,” he said. ‘’We could cut taxes or cut services, and we decided to be realistic.”And in the case of the incinerator, he said, it was too far along to halt. He has now pledged instead to monitor emissions closely.‘’We still don’t want it to be open,” Mr. Pizzarotti said. ‘’We just weren’t the only ones making a decision.”