CAIRO — In the clearest statement yet of the United States’ position on the military’s ouster of President Mohamed Morsi, a senior American diplomat warned on Monday that the generals would jeopardize Egypt’s “second chance” at a democratic transition if their new interim government continued to crack down on Mr. Morsi’s Islamist supporters.“If representatives of some of the largest parties in Egypt are detained or excluded, how are dialogue and participation possible?” the diplomat, Deputy Secretary of State William J. Burns, told journalists after meeting with generals and the interim officials they have appointed.“It is hard to picture how Egypt will be able to emerge from this crisis unless its people come together to find a nonviolent and inclusive path forward,” Mr. Burns said.Mr. Burns, the first senior United States official to visit Cairo since the takeover, spoke against the backdrop of a standoff between the military’s interim government and tens of thousands of Islamists who have staged a two-week sit-in to protest the ouster of Mr. Morsi, Egypt’s first freely elected president.New clashes broke out between the Islamists and the police within hours of Mr. Burns’s statement.Leaving their main encampment, thousands of Mr. Morsi’s supporters filled a major square, blocking a main bridge that is a central artery for the city’s traffic. They set tires on fire to block streets and hurled rocks at police officers who tried to displace them. Riot police officers showered the Morsi supporters with bursts of tear gas, while opponents of the Islamists entered the fray and dragged some to a police station. By 1 a.m., the police had begun firing birdshot as well, state news media said.Crowds of Morsi supporters also gathered across the Nile River at Cairo University and in other cities around the country. At least 22 people were wounded in the Cairo clashes, according to the city’s ambulance authority.Earlier Monday, Islamist militants in the Sinai Peninsula used rocket-propelled grenades to attack a bus, killing 3 people and wounding 17, state news media reported, part of an uptick in such attacks since Mr. Morsi’s ouster.The violence reflected a near total breakdown in Egypt’s political life. Since the generals detained Mr. Morsi nearly two weeks ago, their soldiers and security forces have closed three Islamist satellite networks and arrested scores of Islamist leaders.And the Islamists, whose candidates won three-quarters of the seats in the last parliamentary elections, have almost all denounced the military takeover as an illegitimate coup that overthrew a democratic government. They have refused to negotiate with the military-appointed officials or to participate in their plans for a new political process.Mr. Burns urged both sides to take steps to reconcile. “The government itself has said it wants inclusion of all political streams,” he said. “We have called on the military to avoid any politically motivated arrests. And we have also called upon those who differ with the government to adhere to their absolute obligation to participate peacefully.”He did not repeat American calls for the generals to release Mr. Morsi. Mr. Burns never mentioned the ousted president, nor the Islamist movement behind him, the Muslim Brotherhood. When an Egyptian journalist asked how the new government responded to American calls for Mr. Morsi’s release, Mr. Burns said only, “We have made our views clear on that issue.”Seemingly all sides rebuffed Mr. Burns. The young organizers of the petition drive that preceded Mr. Morsi’s ouster, the ultraconservative Islamist party Al Nour and officials of the Muslim Brotherhood all said they would not meet with Mr. Burns. And state news media reported anonymous military officials saying that Mr. Burns was more determined than his Egyptian counterparts to ensure the continued flow of American military aid.Mr. Morsi’s supporters accuse Washington of giving its blessing to the military’s takeover, while their opponents say the Obama administration wrongly supported Mr. Morsi’s Islamist government. Banners in Tahrir Square — the frequent focal point of protest — depict the American ambassador to Egypt, Anne W. Patterson, with an X across her face.Mr. Burns said he had “no illusions” about the suspicions of many Egyptians toward the United States. He emphasized repeatedly that the United States did not back any individuals or parties in Egypt, only the principles of pluralistic democracy.He said Washington hoped that Egypt’s new transition would be “a chance to learn some of the lessons and correct some of the mistakes of the past two years,” and that the military-led government’s transitional “road map” would “hasten Egypt’s return to a democratically elected civilian government as soon as possible.”At present, that plan calls for a panel of 10 chosen jurists to draft a sweeping constitutional overhaul in less than a month, and for an assembly of 50 appointees from various constituencies to review the package two months after that. The package would then go almost immediately to a national referendum. Legal scholars say the process leaves little room for public debate or input.Mr. Burns, though, struck an optimistic note: “My sense is that people realize that what is most important is that the process be transparent and inclusive.”