BRUSSELS —  Draped down the side of the European Commission’s headquarters here, a 13-story-tall banner urged citizens to vote in the European Parliament elections, proclaiming in English, French and Dutch: “This time it’s different.”Well, maybe. But maybe not.The unwritten subtext was that voters would be choosing not just their representatives in the European Union’s legislature but also the next president of the European Commission, which proposes and enforces the region’s laws. A swath of politicians have said so explicitly. But it ain’t necessarily so.The banner is part of a power struggle in which the Parliament is trying to seize control of the nomination of a successor to the commission president, José Manuel Barroso, from national leaders. The Parliament — acting in the name of democracy — is basing its strategy on an ambiguous clause in the Lisbon Treaty, the updated rules that govern the European Union.The battle broadly pits those who want “more Europe” against those who want to rein in the powers of Brussels and keep big member states in the driver’s seat.The Lisbon Treaty says European Union leaders propose a candidate “taking into account the elections of the European Parliament” and after appropriate consultation. The Parliament must approve the nominee by an absolute majority of its 751 members. If not, the procedure starts again within one month.The tug-of-war begins in earnest on Tuesday, when leaders of the parliamentary groups and the European Union’s heads of state and government meet separately in Brussels to consider the results of the 28-nation election.The leading candidates for commission president are Jean-Claude Juncker of the center-right; Martin Schulz, a Socialist; and Guy Verhofstadt, a liberal. All three crisscrossed Europe for weeks to address rallies, and agreed in principle to support whichever one of them got the most votes.“One of the candidates here will be the next president of the European Commission,” Mr. Schulz said during a live television debate among the front-runners, declaring that the era of back-room deals was over.Mr. Juncker has said it would be a betrayal of the electorate if one of the three candidates did not get the top job. “They might as well tell people never to bother voting again,” he said.The parliamentary power grab is partly a reaction to perceptions that Mr. Barroso has over the last decade acted too much as the obedient servant of the big member states, notably Germany and France.Critics of the Parliament’s bid say national governments, elected on a far higher turnout, remain the primary source of democratic legitimacy in the European Union.They also argue that politicizing the European Commission — which serves as Europe’s impartial competition referee, sits in judgment on national budgets and prosecutes governments that breach European Union rules — would be unnecessary and dangerous.Some warn that any perception that the commission is in the pocket of a Parliament led by federalists eager to raise spending would run counter to the public mood and fan euro-skepticism.Even some veteran integrationists have misgivings. Jean-Louis Bourlanges, a former European Parliament member from France and past president of the pro-integration European Movement, branded the attempt to turn the parliamentary vote into an American-style election a “euro-presidential hoax.”Mr. Bourlanges compares the European Parliament election to a dimmer rather than a light switch. Because of its complex nature, the European Union does not offer stark left-right choices but different shades of consensus.In his view, the commission president, whose powers are limited as chairman of a college of fellow commissioners — equals appointed by member states — needs to remain above party politics to build a broad policy consensus through negotiation. The outcome of this power struggle will likely set a precedent for the balance among the European institutions.In the eyes of federalists, the commission, the Parliament and the European Central Bank are natural allies because they are supranational bodies independent of national governments.That is precisely what the more skeptical governments, notably in Britain and the Netherlands, want to avoid.They are looking to Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany to support them on the principle of preserving European Union leaders’ right to nominate the commission’s president, even though she has backed Mr. Juncker as the candidate for her political family.Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain has told his French and German counterparts that neither Mr. Juncker, a former Luxembourg prime minister, nor Mr. Schulz, a German who is president of the outgoing European Parliament, is acceptable, diplomats say.Both are seen as traditional federalists, two sources familiar with Mr. Cameron’s thinking say, and could be a liability in Britain, where the conservative prime minister has promised to negotiate a repatriation of some European powers and hold an in/out referendum in 2017 if he is re-elected next year.Previous British prime ministers blocked Belgian candidates for the commission presidency in 1994 and 2004. London no longer has a veto, but veteran Brussels diplomats say it is hard to imagine fellow leaders forcing it to a vote and isolating Mr. Cameron.One diplomat involved in past appointment processes forecast weeks of horse-trading in which Parliament may well for the first time reject the first candidate for commission president put forward by European leaders before an eventual compromise.In keeping with tradition, a package deal of top jobs will have to balance left and right, north and south, east and west, big states and small ones, and men and women.“Like a children’s birthday party, everyone will have to get a going-home present,” said the envoy, speaking on condition of anonymity because he was still involved in European negotiations. “The Parliament will have to be promised something else as a consolation.”Paul Taylor is a Reuters correspondent. 