Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Spain investigates Ebola case.Officials are scrutinizing procedures at a Madrid hospital today to find out how a nurse there became the first person known to have contracted the virus outside West Africa.She was part of a team that treated two Spanish missionaries who later died of the virus. Her husband, a traveler from an affected country and another health worker were also hospitalized and are being monitored.• Wedding bells.County clerks in Indiana, Oklahoma, Utah, Virginia and Wisconsin will be busy today as same-sex couples rush to obtain legal marriages.Six other states are almost certain to overturn their bans soon after a Supreme Court decision on Monday that could signal the inevitability of the right of same-sex marriage nationwide.• Militants close in on Syrian town.The Islamic State has raised its black flag in a district of Kobane, a town on the Turkish border, despite airstrikes in the area today by the U.S.-led coalition.More than 160,000 residents, mostly Kurds, have recently fled, and there are fears that those who are trapped will be massacred.• Nobel for the LED.Two Japanese scientists, Isamu Akasaki and Hiroshi Amano, and an American, Shuji Nakamura, today won the 2014 Nobel Prize in Physics for inventing the blue light-emitting diode.The three scientists, working together and separately, found a way to produce blue light beams from semiconductors in the early 1990s.• Protests fade away.Crowds of demonstrators are dwindling in Hong Kong today after student leaders of the pro-democracy movement agreed to formal talks with the government.• Border battles.Pakistani and Indian forces in the disputed Kashmir region are continuing to fight today. On Monday, at least nine people were killed, the highest civilian death toll in a single day from the conflict in more than a decade.And South and North Korean navy patrol boats exchanged fire today at a disputed western sea border.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks  are continuing to fall. European indexes are down more than 1 percent, and Asian markets closed mixed.• Samsung estimated today that its operating profit fell 60 percent and sales lagged 20 percent in the latest quarter. That would make four consecutive quarters of profit decline.• The I.M.F. lowered its estimate for global growth this year to 3.3 percent from 3.7 percent because of slowness in China, Europe, Japan and Latin America.U.S. growth was revised sharply upward, to 2.2 percent this year from 1.7 percent. The fund’s annual meetings with the World Bank begin in Washington this week.• Timothy F. Geithner, the former Treasury secretary, takes the stand today, only one of the star witnesses at the A.I.G. trial. Another former Treasury secretary, Henry M. Paulson Jr., testified on Monday.The former chief executive of A.I.G. is suing the government for $40 billion, saying the $192 billion federal rescue of the insurance company in 2008 imposed punitive terms.• Walmart is ending health benefits to part-time employees who work less than 30 hours. The move is expected to impact about 2 percent of the company’s work force.NOTEWORTHY• That’s a pricey room.A Chinese insurance company has bought the Waldorf-Astoria for $1.95 billion, among the highest prices ever paid for a hotel and more than $1 million per room.• A different shade of red.John Lackey pitched the Boston Red Sox to a World Series win last year, and last night he threw seven innings of one-run ball to lead the St. Louis Cardinals over the Los Angeles Dodgers, 3-1. St. Louis leads the National League division series, two games to one.In the other series, the Washington Nationals kept their season alive with a 4-1 victory over the San Francisco Giants.• Who are they again?Smithsonian Books today releases “The American Vice Presidency: From Irrelevance to Power” by the political journalist Jules Witcover. All 47 men are included, along with their accomplishments, however few.• Where the wild thing was.Animal experts will be trying to determine today how a black bear cub, found dead under some brush in Central Park in New York on Monday, came to be there.• The longest war.Today is the 13th anniversary of the U.S.-led invasion of Afghanistan.The country’s longest war is technically scheduled to end on Dec. 31, the target date for the withdrawal of all combat forces. But a deal signed last week allows 12,000 international soldiers, mainly Americans, to remain.BACK STORYOn the toss of a coin, it could have been called Packard-Hewlett.But David Packard lost to his pal William Hewlett, and the ultimate Silicon Valley start-up that really did start in a garage — now on the National Register of Historic Places — was born as Hewlett-Packard in 1938 in Palo Alto, Calif.This week, the company announced it will break into two parts next year (not to be called Hewlett and Packard), each of which will still be mammoth enough to be a Fortune 500 company.The two Stanford University graduates scored their first big customer in 1940 with the Walt Disney Company, which bought their audio oscillators to make the movie “Fantasia.”Although both new companies will focus on computer technology, HP has been making computers only since 1966, and then only for internal use.In 1976, an engineering intern working there built a prototype for the first personal computer and offered it to the company. HP turned it down and gave him rights to the product.The intern, Stephen Wozniak, later went on to start Apple Computer with Steve Jobs.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Email us at briefing@nytimes.com.