Each week in Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books. This week, Pankaj Mishra and Daniel Mendelsohn discuss how a book like Harold Bloom’s “Western Canon,” published 20 years ago, would be received today.By Pankaj MishraBloom’s complaints about the “Balkanization of literary studies” by the “academic rabble” make a book like his seem very quaint.In a 1915 sketch, the critic Randolph Bourne satirized the Ivy League professor who lives in his wood-paneled study the “literary life, grave, respected and serene,” and regards “modern ideas a futile Babel.” Bourne’s target was John Erskine, later the founder of the “Great Books” curriculum at Columbia, whom he described as a “mournful relic of irrevocable days.” Recoiling from oppressively Anglophile pedagogues, Bourne envisaged a “transnational America” that acknowledged its distinctive ethnic and cultural pluralism.Three years later, Bourne was dead, and the United States emerged from the First World War as one of the most powerful and high-minded countries on earth, the true inheritor of the ostensibly Western values of reason, freedom and democracy that European countries, implicated in slaughter at home and imperial brutality abroad, could no longer convincingly claim for themselves.Erskine’s “Great Books” curriculum advanced what Bourne called a “carefully deodorized and idealized education.” It may have been closing time in the gardens of Europe. But a new empire of sweetness and light arose after the war across the Atlantic, and its most formidable paladins were literary critics with their new canons. In the 1920s and ‘30s, the study of literature — led by bow-tied men on East Coast campuses — became central to the cultural self-definition of a budding superpower’s elites.Published in 1994, Harold Bloom’s “The Western Canon” could barely suppress its nostalgia for a time when the English department was the jewel in the crown of the humanities, and the literary critic with his refined sensibilities seemed the model public intellectual. The long struggle against the totalitarian “East,” which had helped make the “West” seem a coherent entity from Plato to NATO, had ended. Since the 1960s, feminists, left-leaning theorists, African-Americans and other minorities had challenged the entrenched verities of academia and journalism.Bloom’s book shared its tone of grievance with Allan Bloom’s “Closing of the American Mind” (1987) and its presentiment of decline and disorder with Samuel P. Huntington’s “The Clash of Civilizations” (1996). Harold Bloom disavowed any political purpose: “All that the Western canon can bring one is the proper use of one’s own solitude.” Yet he routinely condemned what he called the “school of resentment” — a catchall term for all those uncouth malcontents who disrupted the aesthetic experience of literature with the futile Babel of modern ideas.Bloom gallantly defended his cherished canon from vulgarly political and often subliterate assaults. But he could not see that intellectual and cultural life in the West since the 1960s has been enriched by the representatives of a long invisible majority, even if some of them pointed too stridently to discrepancies in the self-congratulatory narratives of powerful white men. Their contributions have steadily expanded our notions of religion, literature and philosophy.“The Western Canon” itself did not offer a more capacious and complex idea of culture than the one vended by English departments in the 1930s. Bloom actually seemed less intellectually venturesome than the New Humanist Irving Babbitt, a dedicated student of Buddhist and Confucian thought. Asserting that Walt Whitman and Emily Dickinson were greater than any Western poet in the last century and a half, Bloom was guilty of what Edmund Wilson called “the sometimes all too conscious American literary self-glorification which is a part of our American imperialism.”But it is Bloom’s complaints about the “Balkanization of literary studies” by the “academic rabble” that make a book like his seem very quaint in 2014. Aesthetic connoisseurship in the gardens of the West today is menaced not so much by resentful feminists as by the hard-nosed accountants of an insecure commercial society — the same one that in its moment of supreme power had allowed a few men to use their solitude to revive and deepen a fantasy of Western civilization.Pankaj Mishra is the author of several books, including “The Romantics: A Novel,” which won the Los Angeles Times Art Seidenbaum Award for First Fiction, and “From the Ruins of Empire,” a finalist for the Orwell and Lionel Gelber Prizes in 2013. He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature and contributes essays on politics and literature to The New York Review of Books, The New Yorker, The Guardian of London and The London Review of Books.◆ ◆ ◆By Daniel MendelsohnWhat are canons for? Do they innocently enshrine “pure” artistic excellence, or is the agenda always somehow political?Shortly after his death in 406 B.C., Euripides officially entered the literary canon — which is to say, he went straight to hell.In Aristophanes’ comedy “Frogs” (405 B.C.), the god Dionysus, dismayed by the sorry state of the Athenian theater, descends to the Underworld to retrieve Euripides, his favorite avant-garde tragedian. Once there, he finds himself judging a post-mortem literary contest: Euripides, the newcomer, has challenged the long-dead Aeschylus for the title of greatest playwright. Some zany competitions ensue. (One involves literally weighing each dramatist’s words.) Persuaded to choose the playwright who will “save the city,” Dionysus crowns the old-fashioned Aeschylus. As the author of the “Oresteia” ascends earthward, he designates Sophocles as his successor.Whatever ancient theater gossip it provides, the questions “Frogs” raises are ultimately about the canon. (The play’s trio of “great” tragedians — Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides — is, after all, the same threesome still taught today.) Who defines it? How do we know what’s “the greatest”? And, most elusively, what are canons for? Do they innocently enshrine “pure” artistic excellence, or is the agenda always somehow political? (“Save the city,” indeed.)These old questions hover once again on the 20th anniversary of Harold Bloom’s controversial “The Western Canon.” Published at the height of the culture wars, the book ardently defended the idea of works whose aesthetic value was self-evident from what Bloom dismissed as “the school of resentment” — the feminist, deconstructionist and Marxist critics for whom a rigid curriculum of “Great Books” was anathema. To Bloom’s nemeses, the canon was merely a redoubt of white, male, imperialist values: a cultural Stonehenge, as the Oxford literary critic Terry Eagleton put it, best curated by the National Trust.What’s interesting today is how dated this controversy can seem. One big difference between 1994 and now is the Internet. Bloom and his critics were writing just before the remarkable proliferation of online vehicles for cultural discussion and criticism of books, movies, theater, dance and music, which has radically altered the balance among academic, professional and amateur criticism. Today, audiences as well as critics play a lively role in establishing which works get discussed, analyzed, noticed; the boil of resentment toward the literary gods — the Dionysuses who alone were once privileged to enshrine authors — has been lanced.From the vantage point of two decades it’s clear, too, that there was justice on both sides. Much depends on whether you see canons as artificial or organic, prescriptive or descriptive. The traditional canon — still prescribed, like intellectual medicine, on many a curriculum — is, in fact, good for you: It provides invaluable insight into the thinking in the past that has helped form the present. (Americans familiar with Enlightenment thinkers like Locke and Rousseau have a deeper understanding of their own polity because those authors profoundly influenced the founders.)But canons also inevitably shift and expand, not merely enshrining the thought of the past but reflecting an evolving perception of the worlds and cultures we inhabit in the present. This is why a reasonable canon today will include voices that went unheard in the 18th century — or even 50 years ago: the novels of Toni Morrison, with their insistence on acknowledging the moral legacy of American slavery, or the works of Derek Walcott, with their rueful vision of the inheritance of European colonialism.That the strident posturing of 1994 — the self-dramatizing “elegies” for the death of literature that frame Bloom’s book, his opponents’ preposterous ejection of Proust and Joyce from their syllabuses — now seems passé itself reminds us that cultural landscapes change. As, indeed, do literary reputations. Just ask Aristophanes’ Euripides, who learned to his cost that yesterday’s superstars sometimes end up croaking away in the dark.Daniel Mendelsohn is the author of seven books, including the international best seller “The Lost: A Search for Six of Six Million”; two collections of essays on books, film, theater and television; and a translation of the poetry of Cavafy. His essays and reviews have appeared frequently in The New Yorker, The New York Review of Books and The New York Times Book Review. Mendelsohn has won the National Book Critics Circle Award for memoir and the NBCC’s Nona Balakian Citation for Excellence in Book Reviewing; the National Jewish Book Award; and the George Jean Nathan Prize for Drama Criticism. His most recent book, “Waiting for the Barbarians: Essays From the Classics to Pop Culture,” was a finalist for the NBCC award in criticism and the PEN Art of the Essay prize. He teaches at Bard College.