BANGKOK —  Like the protesters trying to overthrow the Thai government, Somchai Srisutthiyakorn says he is against holding elections next month and does not think they will help resolve the country’s increasingly violent political turmoil.But Mr. Somchai is not a protester. He is one of five members of the country’s Election Commission whose mission, according to Thai law, is to arrange, provide support for and promote elections.“The Election Commission must arrange elections,” Mr. Somchai said in an interview this week. “But we must be sure the election benefits society.”Mr. Somchai said that he and the other commissioners were in agreement: They did not oppose elections but wanted them held at an unspecified “suitable time.”Mr. Somchai’s lack of enthusiasm for the Feb. 2 elections, which were endorsed by royal decree last month when the government dissolved Parliament, underlines the depth of divisions in Thai society after two months of debilitating protests in Bangkok.In the latest act of violence, Kwanchai Praipana, a prominent government supporter, was shot and wounded in northern Thailand on Wednesday, a day after the government declared a state of emergency in Bangkok.Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra has been under intense pressure over the last two months as protesters have become increasingly aggressive in their campaign to banish her, scuttle elections and overthrow her government.But equally challenging for her government has been resistance from inside government agencies. In addition to the Election Commission’s efforts to put off elections, the Constitutional Court recently ruled against the government in two cases, including ruling against a constitutional amendment that would have made the entire Senate directly elected. And the National Anticorruption Commission has announced that it is pursuing two large investigations against members of the governing party, Pheu Thai, that could ultimately lead to members being banned from politics or the party being dissolved.Critics and more dispassionate analysts in Thailand have been struck by what they describe as an Election Commission reluctant to hold elections. “There seems no historical case — worldwide — of an official body in charge of holding an election that actively and aggressively opposed an election from every possible angle, at every possible moment,” said a recent commentary in The Bangkok Post, an influential English-language daily newspaper.Government supporters say Mr. Somchai, the commissioner, sympathizes with the demonstrations, offering as evidence a photo of him on the Internet posing with two people at one of the protest sites in Bangkok. Mr. Somchai says he happened to be at a shopping mall situated in the middle of the protests and “it’s common for people to take photos with me.”Mr. Somchai has also been criticized by some for his adversarial comments toward the government.Last week he said that to get Ms. Yingluck, Thailand’s first female prime minister, to meet with him, he will propose a rendezvous at the Four Seasons hotel in Bangkok. That was a reference to rumors — denied by Ms. Yingluck — that she met a real estate mogul there for a tryst.Mr. Somchai says with a smile that he made the comment to “get someone’s attention.”But the governing party did not take it as a joke. The comments about the Four Seasons are listed as evidence in impeachment proceedings started last week by the governing party against Mr. Somchai.The attempted impeachment, which accuses Mr. Somchai of “dishonestly exercising or omitting to exercise any of his duties,” is seen largely as symbolic because the process is likely to take months, presumably after elections are held.To his detractors, Mr. Somchai exemplifies a Bangkok-oriented mentality that discounts the wishes of people in the country’s populous northern provinces, who by most accounts are eager to cast their votes next month.In the interview, Mr. Somchai emphasized the awakening of the Bangkok middle class, which is “made up of educated people.” Thailand’s current deadlock, he said, “is a phenomenon of middle-class people in society who can no longer bear the political conditions of the present day.”The protests began in November, when Ms. Yingluck’s party railroaded through the lower house of Parliament an amnesty bill that would have allowed her brother, former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, to return home by wiping clean corruption cases against him.The bill was ultimately withdrawn after an uproar, but protests against it gained momentum in Bangkok and turned into a larger antigovernment movement targeting what opponents say is an unhealthy domination of politics by the Shinawatra clan. The government, protest leaders said, was more concerned about Mr. Thaksin than the well-being of the country.The protesters have raided government offices, and shut down and occupied major intersections. The state of emergency announced Tuesday has not yet been in enforced and protesters on Wednesday destroyed the sign outside of the national police headquarters.Protesters are calling for a hiatus of democracy and the establishment of an unelected “people’s council” to run the country. The demonstrators are allied with the oldest political party in the country, the Democrats, who are boycotting the elections.But the protests have caused a backlash among government supporters in the north and northeast, who are angry at the attempts to block elections that their party is considered almost certain to win.This schism in Thailand between northerners — who are grateful that the governing party represents their interests — and wealthier residents in Bangkok who resent the newfound power of the provincial masses, is at the heart of the crisis. It is also at the heart of the debate over whether the country should proceed with elections.Last month, protesters prevented the registration of candidates in several districts in southern Thailand, part of their campaign to block the elections.Sodsri Satayathum, a former election commissioner, said she recognized the difficulty of the situation but that the Election Commission should have done more, including asking the military to help ensure that candidates could register.Because protesters blocked registration in 28 districts, Parliament may fall short of a constitutional requirement that 95 percent of seats be filled even if the election is held, making it impossible to seat a new government.“We cannot allow the violators of the law to do anything they want — and allow the country to go without any rule of law,” she said in an interview.Ms. Sodsri said the Election Commission had no choice but to go ahead with the elections.“The law doesn’t allow postponement,” she said. Mr. Somchai said that he and other commissioners were facing “massive pressure” from antigovernment protesters and that the military had declined requests to help guard the election process.“I am afraid that if the election goes ahead, there will be violence and it may lead to a coup,” he said. His critics say he has it the wrong way around: They say putting off elections will create a power vacuum that could lead to a coup.Mr. Somchai said he was aware that the Election Commission had the power to call upon the security forces to ensure that the elections took place on time. But the law, he said, is not paramount at a time of intense turmoil.“Our society today cannot only live by the law,” he said. “We also have to make sure the country survives.”