NEW DELHI —  In Madison Square Garden in New York on Sunday, about 20,000 people, most of them aligned with the Democratic Party, gathered to proclaim their love for a man whom the Republicans might have claimed as their own.The Hindu diaspora that had come to cheer the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, wants the United States to be liberal, respectful of religious minorities and generous to immigrants, but its members back a  different set of political values in the country where they were born. Values that triumphed with the ascent of Mr. Modi, whom the Indian stock market adores, who complained in March that his political rivals were killing rhinos to make room for Bangladeshi migrants, who has shown disdain for government spending on the poor and whom human rights advocates hold responsible for the slaughter of hundreds of Muslims in 2002, as did the American government, which barred him from entering the United States until a few months ago, when he became prime minister.Over the years, Mr. Modi has rehabilitated himself from a man accused of crimes against humanity to a leader who can influence the Indian economy through the myths of his personality. In that process, he has given the rabid and the sane and humane a few honorable reasons to love him.His audience in Madison Square Garden was so besotted with him that, even though his speech was unremarkable and contained the daft alliterations for which he has an incurable love (“Democracy, demographic dividend and demand”), they applauded almost every line. When he paused between sentences, they imagined there was a hidden joke or deep meaning, and applauded his silences too, grasping nuances where there were none. Mr. Modi appeared to enjoy his own oratory, unaware of any mishaps.He referred to Mohandas Gandhi as Mohanlal Gandhi. A day earlier, he stood with Hugh Jackman in Central Park and quoted from a film the actor had no part in: “May the force be with you!” These were minor gaffes by the standards of the man who went to Bhutan and called it Nepal. But he is so popular with those who dominate the noise on social media that he usually gets away with things that would damage the less fortunate.In the portrayal of Mr. Modi’s apparent charms, there is little difference now between the predominant tone on social media and the mainstream news media, which have covered his visit to the United States with delirious optimism. Such journalistic affection for a politician is unusual anywhere in the democratic world. The owners of two leading newspapers and the editor of one told me, in their different ways, that their adoration of Mr. Modi is not because of any ideological shift, but a result of their conviction that this man can revive the economy, which greatly affects the revenues of mainstream journalism.But Mr. Modi has suffered some upsets since taking over as prime minister. His Bharatiya Janata Party has fared below expectations in some by-elections. And in the state of Maharashtra, which goes to the polls in two weeks, the local political force, Shiv Sena, has broken its 25-year alliance with Mr. Modi’s party because it felt that the B.J.P.’s excessive demands were disproportionate to its current popularity.The Shiv Sena, which has gained its influence by using violence against Muslims and poor migrants in Mumbai, the state capital, has for the first time decided to pick a fight with the mighty — the prosperous traders who hail from the neighboring state of Gujarat, Mr. Modi’s home. Many of India’s richest are Gujaratis living in Mumbai. The Shiv Sena is attempting to brand the impending political battle against Mr. Modi as a struggle of the poor against the rich who  occupy the best real estate in Mumbai.The consequences of all political responses to Mr. Modi will be borne by the residents of India. Members of the diaspora have the luxury to profess love for their motherland and to finance their beloved patriarch from a comfortable distance.Manu Joseph is author of the novel “The Illicit Happiness of Other People.”