Good evening. Here’s what you need to know from NYT Now:• The Secret Service’s image. “Some of what helps the agency protect the president is the mythology that has grown up of this impenetrable force that has eyes everywhere.”That’s our White House correspondent Michael D. Shear on the Secret Service, whose reputation alone has helped avert attacks.“People wouldn’t even dare try get through such an invincible shield,” he says.But that reputation has repeatedly been dented. There was this weekend’s report that it took the agency days to conclude that a gunman had fired on the White House in 2011, even though witnesses reported it on Twitter in real time.And now the disclosure that an intruder last month overpowered an agent inside the North Portico and passed all the way through the East Room.“If some guy can jump a fence and run into the White House, that may embolden others who have more malicious intent,” Mr. Shear says.• Coming to a boil.When Hong Kong was handed over to the Chinese in 1997, Beijing promised it would remain an island of democracy for 50 years.But the mass street protests over choosing the territory’s next leader have thrown the strains of the “one country, two systems” approach into sharp relief, says Michael Wines, our former Beijing bureau chief.“While Hong Kong retains an impressive list of freedoms not granted mainland Chinese, its democratic order is slowly acquiring a mainland tint,” he says.The changes were so incremental that many in Hong Kong hardly noticed the shift until Beijing began exerting more influence in selecting candidates for the next leader of Hong Kong.“You know the old adage about a lobster in a pot: turn up the heat slowly, and he won’t even know he is being cooked,” Mr. Wines says.“Is the pot heating too quickly?”• Close to home.Hundreds of readers have written in about the story of a New Jersey woman whose nap between low-wage shifts proved fatal.The story, written by our reporter Rachel Swarns, provoked an outpouring of sorrow and sympathy about the struggles of the working poor.The woman, Maria Fernandes, kept a container of gas in the cargo hold of her truck, in case she ran out. The police say it looks as if she was overcome by the fumes as she slept in the vehicle.“It’s not quite ‘it could happen to you,’" Ms. Swarns says, "but it could happen to someone you know — or kind of know.”She was drawn to the story partly because the woman “felt like someone who might have joked with me or poured me a cup of coffee before my commute to work.”Ms. Fernandes lived just three miles from Ms. Swarns, in an apartment “that didn’t even have a kitchen,” she says.“Worlds collide all the time in ways we don’t think about,” she says, and the death of Ms. Fernandes “makes people think about it.”MARKETS• Wall Street stocks closed down. The S.&P. 500 lost 0.3 percent.TONIGHT• He can sing, too.The Oscar-winning actor Kevin Spacey, backed by a 40-piece orchestra, is giving a gala concert tonight in Washington to benefit his foundation, which helps emerging film and theater artists.He says he’ll perform songs by Billy Joel, Simon & Garfunkel and Frank Sinatra.• A celebration of the written word.In “The 50 Year Argument,” Martin Scorsese and his longtime collaborator David Tedeschi examine The New York Review of Books, known for its lengthy and erudite essays.“Watching the film is a lot like reading one of those articles,” writes our critic Mike Hale. “Your attention wanders here and there, but when it’s over you take satisfaction in knowing you’ve learned an awful lot about something you were only superficially familiar with before." (9 p.m. Eastern, HBO)• “Frankly, my dear.”Revisit the highly varnished civil war epic “Gone With the Wind,” starring Vivien Leigh and Clark Gable, on the 75th anniversary of its release. (10 p.m. Eastern, TCM) • If you’re staying up … On “The Daily Show”: Matt Bai, the author of “All the Truth Is Out: The Week Politics Went Tabloid.” (11 p.m. Eastern, Comedy Central)“The Colbert Report”: The chef Jamie Oliver, author of “Jamie Oliver’s Comfort Food: The Ultimate Weekend Cookbook.” (11:31 p.m. Eastern, Comedy Central)“The Tonight Show”: Ben Affleck, star of “Gone Girl”; Kate Walsh of “Bad Judge”; Tony Bennett performs. (11:35 p.m. Eastern, NBC)TOMORROW• Speaking out.Gabrielle Giffords, the former Arizona congresswoman nearly killed in a mass shooting, releases a new book with her husband, the astronaut Mark Kelly.“Enough” combines an outline of their arguments for responsible gun ownership with personal accounts of Ms. Giffords’s recovery after she was shot in the head in 2011. ​• The speeches conclude. Ambassadors and world leaders finish their addresses on the final day of the 69th session of the United Nations General Assembly.Adeel Hassan and Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.Your Evening Briefing is posted at 5 p.m. weekdays.Don’t miss Your Morning Briefing at 6 a.m. weekdays.What would you like to see here? Email us at nytnow@nytimes.com.Follow us on Twitter: @nytnow.