Among the tear gas and the milk, the battle tanks and the upraised hands, the bottle bombs and the tender embraces, the protests in Ferguson, Mo., brought out a mysterious sign. The sign bobbed in the crowd one evening. Like so many tenuous claims, it even got to be on CNN. No one knew much about the sign, which made it more ominous. The sign said, “ISIS here.”The alarmist, conspiratorially minded corners of the American news media seized on the sign, which referred to the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. It was proof, some said, of a terrorist threat ignored at the nation’s peril. But it was just as likely to be an overzealous protester, bent on grabbing 15 minutes, or seconds, of social-media glory.Yet the sign was not without significance. Whatever its provenance, it bespoke a larger truth: the Fergusons of the world make the work of the ISISes of the world that much easier.We’re living through a particularly anarchic season in world affairs. If one has ever dreamed of shooting a commercial jet out of the sky, or of invading a foreign country, or of starting your own caliphate, this seems like a rare, historic opportunity to make a go with relative impunity.Behind the chaos is a void of influence right now — a void in which countries are unable to prevent other countries or ragamuffin groups from doing bad things. And behind the void of influence is a void of example, which is where Ferguson — but not only Ferguson — comes into the picture.By failing to embody so many of its own ideals nowadays, the United States (like other liberal democracies) deprives the world of a compelling counterweight to the ideas (such as they are) of so-called Putinism, ISISism, Islamism, Chinese authoritarianism and other -isms on the march.In this liquid, interdependent age, many people around the world wonder what to believe in. One sees a version of this in fast-growing developing countries, where change is tearing down old cultures and old certainties without convincingly replacing them. There’s a European version, where large swaths of a continent that once saw itself as the cradle of modernity now find its ways of life unsustainable. And there’s an American version, where high ideals still vociferously preached to the world are at times hard to locate at home.America tells Myanmar to treat its Rohingya minority better, but it uses tear gas on minorities in Ferguson and, around the country, ensnares them in its criminal-justice dragnet. America advises nations to grow their middle classes, while its own middle class shrinks. America protests the treatment of journalists in Afghanistan and China, while arresting journalists in Ferguson and threatening a reporter in Washington with prison time for refusing to reveal a confidential source. America tells Iraqi and Egyptian and Afghan politicians to transcend tribalism and trust in the give-and-take of democracy, while its own democracy is all but paralyzed by tribal conflict. America militates against dynasties in other countries, while hereditary privilege gathers steam at home — as elite colleges have become sanctuaries of upper-middle-class young people and the White House or the president’s cabinet has included a member of the Bush or Clinton families in 33 of the last 34 years.And yet there are real, ineffable things that make the United States a wondrous place — its daily decency, its openness to the children of other countries, its why-not ethos of invention and tolerance of failure. But these can be subtle wonders, appreciated only by those who’ve lived them.What the world sees of America, looking from afar, is a lack of belief in its own creeds — a lack that is all too inspiring to the wrong people.