BERLIN — The president of Russian Railways, Vladimir I. Yakunin, a longtime associate of President Vladimir V. Putin, is persona non grata to Washington. Sanctioned by the United States in retaliation for support of Moscow’s annexation of Crimea, he has been banned from entering the country and any assets there have been frozen.But Mr. Yakunin, a familiar figure in European and Asian capitals as he seeks to expand his rail network, is under no such restrictions in Europe. On Thursday in Berlin, he co-hosted a conference titled “Europe: Lost in Translation?” at which he treated Germans still advocating dialogue with Russia to a blast of icy condemnation direct from Moscow.With language and tone that recalled the rhetoric of the Cold War, Mr. Yakunin criticized Germans as kowtowing to the United States, assailed the West for what he saw as devotion to unbridled capitalism and warned above all against trying to force Russia to adopt Western cultural values.Pointing to the victory of the bearded Austrian drag queen Conchita Wurst last weekend in the annual parade of kitsch that is the Eurovision song contest, Mr. Yakunin stoutly defended Russia’s law against what Moscow considers gay propaganda and accused the West of seeking to impose “vulgar ethno-fascism.”“The antique definition of democracy had nothing to do with bearded women,” said Mr. Yakunin, who was sanctioned by the United States on March 20.Mr. Yakunin, a patron of the Russian Orthodox Church, also criticized same-sex marriage and same-sex families. “I will believe in this only on the day when I see a pregnant man,” he said. The relative openness in the West to gay and lesbian relationships rankles many Russians.Citing research that he said showed teenagers are highly vulnerable on questions of sexual identity, Mr. Yakunin rose to the defense of Yelena Mizulina, a deputy in Russia’s state Duma who wrote the law banning “propaganda of nontraditional sexual relationships to minors,'’ which set off an international outcry, including calls to boycott the Sochi Winter Olympics.Matthias Platzeck, a German Social Democrat who is the chairman of the German-Russian Forum, a generally pro-Moscow business group, in turn said that the Russian law was detrimental to community values and urged Russia to be more self-critical in its handling of the Ukraine conflict in order to enable a fresh start in relations with the West.About 200 people attended the meeting, mostly Germans and Russians. Such meetings take place on almost a weekly basis in Germany, which has traded and warred with Russians for centuries and even during the Cold War hosted a stream of senior Soviets unseen in other NATO countries.Since the crisis in Ukraine erupted, many of the meetings have been downgraded, but polls show that at least half of Germans support a continuing dialogue with Russia, some citing Germany’s guilt for the deaths of millions of Russians and Ukrainians in World War II.German business is by no means alone in Europe in defending dealings with Russia, which often involve years of investment, personal ties, exchange of know-how and energy dependency. So far, the West has threatened more severe sanctions on Russia only if Moscow invades Ukraine or significantly disrupts its scheduled presidential election on May 25.Mr. Yakunin found himself in unlikely agreement with Western conservatives in assessing sanctions so far. “Pure propaganda” that had not hurt business, he said.