WASHINGTON —  A bipartisan panel created by President Obama after many voters waited hours to cast ballots in 2012 on Wednesday recommended ways to keep delays to no more than a half-hour. But changes are up to the states and 8,000 local jurisdictions, where voting laws have been a partisan battleground since the 2000 presidential recount.After surveying local officials, the commission also warned of two potential crises: Voting machines bought a decade ago, when federal funds were made available as a post-recount remedy, are breaking down or obsolete. And local schools, long a favored polling place and accessible to the disabled, increasingly are unavailable as more of them restrict entry in response to shootings like the massacre in Newtown, Conn.Mr. Obama noted in his 2012 victory speech that some voters were still in line that night, even as he spoke, and then announced the 10-member commission a year ago in his State of the Union address. He received the report, six months in the making, at the White House from the panel’s co-chairmen — Robert F. Bauer, a Democrat, and Benjamin L. Ginsberg, a Republican, the top lawyers for his own and Mitt Romney’s 2012 campaigns. The panel also included executives, academics and state and local officials.“Unlike a lot of countries, we’ve got a pretty complex system,” Mr. Obama said on Wednesday as the report was released. “We vote a lot. We have local jurisdictions that run these elections, and it makes things a little bit more complicated.”Calling the recommendations “outstanding,” he said, “We intend to publicize this and to then reach out to stakeholders all across the country to make sure that we can implement this.”Long waits have frustrated and turned away voters in numerous states in recent presidential elections, especially in Democratic-leaning cities and small-town college campuses. The commission concluded that they “result from a combination of mismanagement, limited or misallocated resources, and long ballots.”Besides making recommendations, the panel created online tools for local administrators to better allocate resources like machines, staff and polling volunteers, and compiled best practices for managing lines, at the website supportthevoter.gov.Given the partisan nature of much of the debate over voting practices, commission members said they focused on problems that they could unanimously agree on, and were fixable. The panel did not, for example, address the matter of voter identification cards, a particularly contentious issue that Republicans in some state legislatures have pressed.Among the commission’s recommendations:■ All citizens should be allowed to register to vote or update their registrations online, to reduce time-consuming confusion at polling places.■ States should exchange data from their voter and motor-vehicle lists with other states to keep voters rolls current as many Americans move.■ All states should expand alternatives to Election Day voting, like in-person early voting and mail-in ballots. The panel did not recommend a time period for early voting; in some states Republicans have sought to restrict it.■ Schools should continue to be used as polling places, and local officials should make Election Day a day off for teachers and students where security is a concern.■ To address the impending shortage of usable voting machines, and hold down costs, the process of setting standards and certifying machines should be overhauled to allow local officials to adopt widely available technologies, such as iPads.Voter rights groups generally applauded the recommendations, and called on states to act. “These will be the new benchmarks against which future elections will be judged,” said Wendy R. Weiser, director of the Democracy Program at the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University.