Good evening. Here’s what you need to know from NYT Now:• Driven out. Australia announced today that it would try to resettle refugees from numerous countries in Cambodia, drawing criticism from human rights groups.But the move was also a reminder that many countries are grappling with an extraordinary global tide of refugees, thanks to the conflicts in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan and Eritrea.“More than 330,000 people tried to get asylum in the first half of the year, and experience shows even more will be trying in the second half,” says our correspondent in Geneva, Nick Cumming-Bruce.“The world hasn’t witnessed this number of asylum seekers since the Balkan wars in the 1990s.”And that just counts the small fraction who are registered with the United Nations. Experts put the worldwide number of people diplaced by conflict at more than 50 million, Mr. Cumming-Bruce says.• No, you tell him!Kim Jong-un, the leader of North Korea, was “not feeling well,” a state-run television station reported this week. He was shown walking with a limp, and appears to have gained weight.But his doctors may not be inclined to push him to do anything about it, says Choe Sang-hun, our correspondent in Seoul.The North Korean government, he says, is believed to maintain a “small army of doctors dedicated to looking after the ruling Kim family and the loyal elites.”But even so, Mr. Choe says, having frank conversations with the portly, 30-ish dictator wouldn’t be easy.“Outside analysts,” he says, “have long suspected that those around Mr. Kim indulge in flattery but never dare offer tough advice — like a badly needed diet — for the young leader, who demonstrated his unpredictable ruthlessness by executing his own uncle last year.”• Dinner will not be served.The White House says it doesn’t anticipate any “special obstacles” as Prime Minister Narendra Modi fasts for a Hindu holiday, Navratri, during his visit to Washington early next week.But it might be hard to create a hospitable environment when a key component — food — is out of the equation.“Table diplomacy is a real, viable thing,” says Kim Severson, our food writer.“It’s this thought from which state dinners spring, taking this very human elemental thing, breaking bread together, and applying it to modern politics.”With Mr. Modi limited to liquids, she says, that kind of communion won’t be as easy to recreate.“You’re taking that completely off the table, so to speak.”MARKETS• Wall Street stocks rebounded. The S.&P. 500 gained 0.9 percent.TONIGHT• A twisted tale.“The Boxtrolls,” opening today, is an animated movie that offers a fresh take on a familiar story line involving misunderstood monsters, a bad guy and a struggling hero.“But it does so with refreshing wit and energy,” writes our critic A.O. Scott. “Like much of the best animation, ‘The Boxtrolls’ is above all a marvel of craft.”Here’s what else is new in theaters.• On your marks. Eleven teams head to Times Square, where the 25th season of “The Amazing Race” begins.The winners of the around-the-world competition earn a $1 million prize. (8 p.m. Eastern, CBS)• A national conversation.PBS broadcasts a town-hall meeting that was moderated by Gwen Ifill last Sunday at the University of Missouri-St. Louis, focused on the aftermath of the fatal shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo. (8 p.m. Eastern, but times may vary)• If you’re staying up … On “Real Time With Bill Maher”: the social activist Naomi Klein and the filmmaker Alexandra Pelosi are the interview guests.The Times columnist Charles M. Blow, the Republican strategist John Feehery, and Gen. Anthony C. Zinni, the former head of the United States Central Command, are at the round table. (10 p.m. Eastern and repeated at 11 p.m., HBO)“The Tonight Show”: Matthew Broderick and Nathan Lane, reunited on Broadway in “It’s Only a Play”; Robert Plant performs. (11:35 p.m. Eastern, NBC)“Late Show With David Letterman”: Ted Danson, a star of the film “The One I Love”; the comedian Andrew Norelli. (11:35 p.m. Eastern, CBS)THIS WEEKENDSaturday• “Saturday Night Live” begins its 40th season. Chris Pratt is the host, Ariana Grande is the musical guest. Michael Che and Colin Jost are at the “Weekend Update” desk. (11:35 p.m. Eastern, NBC)• Devoted golf fans will be rising early to watch the Ryder Cup, live from Scotland (3 a.m. Eastern, NBC; taped replay is at 1 p.m.)• Jay Z and No Doubt headline the 2014 Global Citizen Festival, a free (ticketed) concert on the Great Lawn in New York’s Central Park. Live on MSNBC at 3 p.m. Eastern, NBC at 8 p.m., and on livestream.• George Clooney is marrying Amal Alamuddin, a British lawyer, in Venice, where the couple first met.• “@Large: Ai Weiwei on Alcatraz,” an installation of 176 Lego portraits of political prisoners, opens inside the former prison in San Francisco Bay.• A verdict is expected in the retrial of Hosni Mubarak, Egypt’s former president, resulting from the deaths of peaceful pro-democracy demonstrators opposed to his rule.Sunday• Baseball’s regular season comes to an end. That means the Yankees’ Derek Jeter’s final game — and it’s in Boston, against the rival Red Sox. (1:35 p.m. Eastern, TBS)• The final day of the Ryder Cup begins at 7 a.m. Eastern on NBC.• In London, the Miami Dolphins play the Oakland Raiders, with Def Leppard performing the pregame show. (1 p.m. Eastern, CBS)• “The Simpsons” begins its 26th season, with much speculation that Krusty the Clown will be killed off. (8 p.m. Eastern, Fox)• The Simpsons family will also be in the season premiere of “Family Guy” in a special crossover episode. (9 p.m. Eastern, Fox)• President Obama opens up to Steve Kroft on “60 Minutes.” (7 p.m. Eastern, following football)• The season ending of “Masters of Sex.” (10 p.m. Eastern, Showtime)Adeel Hassan and Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.Your Evening Briefing is posted at 5 p.m. weekdays.Don’t miss Your Morning Briefing at 6 a.m. weekdays.What would you like to see here? Email us at nytnow@nytimes.com.Follow us on Twitter: @nytnow.