WASHINGTON —  A renewed push to have Congress take another look at the way sexual assault is handled in the armed forces is complicating efforts to pass a huge defense bill, threatening a signature piece of bipartisan legislation that needs approval before the end of the year.With several high-profile assault and rape cases dominating the headlines, Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand, Democrat of New York, is asking for a vote on a bill that would remove sexual assault prosecutions from the oversight of military commanders.It is a fight Ms. Gillibrand lost earlier this year when her bill fell several votes short of breaking a filibuster.“We should all be able to agree our brave men and women in uniform deserve blind justice,” she said. “The scale should not be tipped in either direction in favor of the victim or the accused.”The issue has defied the typical partisan divisions that tend to muddle most issues on Capitol Hill. That was evident on Tuesday when Ms. Gillibrand stood beside colleagues who rarely vote with her on anything — including Tea Party favorites like Senators Ted Cruz of Texas and Rand Paul of Kentucky — at a news conference in the Capitol.“I don’t understand any argument why we shouldn’t be doing this,” Mr. Paul said.But supporters of changing the way the military oversees sexual assault cases face opposition from the Pentagon and members of both parties on Capitol Hill who agree that more should be done, but say breaking the chain of command is the wrong approach.Congress has already passed a more modest set of changes to prevent commanders from overturning sexual assault verdicts. But it left control of court-martial proceedings within the chain of command, a sticking point supporters of Ms. Gillibrand’s effort see as a major obstacle to reducing the problem because many victims fear retribution from their superiors.Many lawmakers are not eager to have that fight again, but Ms. Gillibrand said she would like another vote before year’s end. She is seeking an amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act, which spells out the spending priorities of the Defense Department.The chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, would prefer not to have any amendments because of the Pandora’s box of requests that could result with a bill so large. In the past, for example, the defense bill has been used to try to set restrictions on the transfer of detainees at the prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona and a member of the Armed Services Committee, said that if Ms. Gillibrand was allowed an amendment, other senators should be as well. “Why should she have some exclusivity?” he asked. “There are plenty of issues that, if we open up the process, we could have full-fledged debates and amendments on.”Getting a vote and then breaking a filibuster will be challenging. And Ms. Gillibrand said she had asked President Obama to consider taking executive action on the issue. He replied that he would look into it, she said. Asked about whether she would hold up the confirmation of a new defense secretary over it, she said she would “think about that.”The Pentagon and some Republican lawmakers say that removing commanders from the process would have a negative impact on order and discipline.“The military’s a unique place; it’s not a democracy,” Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, said at a hearing on the matter last year. “When it comes to good order and discipline of a command, we have generally held the view that the one person that has the power to determine good order and discipline — and to make sure it’s present — is the military commander.”Lawmakers who support the proposal hoped to harness renewed interest in the issue, which comes after a recent article in The New York Times Magazine that documented the military’s difficulties in addressing sexual assault. Adding to the momentum are other high-profile cases, including that of a young woman who said multiple men had raped her at a fraternity at the University of Virginia, which was detailed in an article in Rolling Stone last month. The comedian Bill Cosby is also facing accusations that over the years he abused numerous women, several of whom have come forward in recent weeks.