“The Sopranos” was once the quintessential American television show. Now, it’s “Downton Abbey.”Beneath all the seigneurial duty and damask, this British series about aristocrats and their servants is at heart as American as Apple computers or the Magic Kingdom. “Downton Abbey” begins a fourth season on PBS on Sunday, and it still draws huge audiences in the United States, possibly because it cleverly filters British social history through the biases and preoccupations of American pop culture.Every time “Downton Abbey” returns to PBS, the season premiere unleashes a torrent of intense if slightly shamefaced meditations on why Americans, who fought a revolution to free themselves from the British crown, are so enchanted by a honeyed look at wealthy lords and ladies and the butlers and maids who look after them.It could be that what really entrances viewers here isn’t Anglophilia or a vestigial yearning for a monarch, but rather the mirror that “Downton Abbey” holds up to America. It’s a show about class differences that panders to contemporary notions of democracy and equality. In Season 4, which opens in the 1920s, the righteous cause is no longer the Irish chauffeur who dares to court the earl’s daughter, it’s an African-American jazz musician who has caught the eye of the earl’s niece.The narrative this time around is even more stretched, derivative and repetitive than Season 3’s, but almost ingeniously so: It is both utterly predictable and surprisingly addictive. Julian Fellowes, who also wrote “Gosford Park,” has borrowed some of those plotlines to plump up the season’s narrative, but he has left out any of that movie’s cynicism.Mr. Fellowes’s show could easily be dismissed as a Harlequin romance novel in morocco leather binding, but it casts a spell on viewers not unlike the allure of a Harry Potter novel. Strangely, though, J. K. Rowling’s Hogwarts characters kept growing darker and more complex as they aged, while the residents of Downton are growing ever nicer and more one-dimensional.There is something almost subversively populist and peppy about this depiction of the class divide. The masters address a footman about his personal life at the dinner table; butlers give business advice to their employers. And the kinds of topics that once filled episodes of “The Oprah Winfrey Show,” including homophobia, rape and abortion, are addressed within a tableau of European privilege but resolved in the ways of the new world.Even the widest social gulfs are overcome. In Season 2, the Irish ex-chauffeur marries the earl’s youngest daughter, Sybil, and the consequences there are closer to those in “My Fair Lady” than they are in George Bernard Shaw’s more mordant original, “Pygmalion.” In the play’s epilogue, Eliza Doolittle married the genteel twit Freddy and struggled to make a living ever after. In the Broadway musical, of course, she finds true love with Henry Higgins.In “Downton Abbey,” Sybil (Jessica Brown-Findlay) doesn’t grow disillusioned or alienated by her new, much-lower-class life in Ireland. She dies, young, brave and beautiful in childbirth. (It’s the snooty, titled London specialist, not the kindly local doctor, who is to blame.) Her death has left a young widower who can be open to new love interests.Even when terrible things happen, damage is contained and good will restored. The series is optimistic, warmhearted, almost Reaganesque in its ability to find a rainbow. Mr. Fellowes holds up a bowdlerized edition of British society, where beneath a thin veneer of stratification, servants and masters are friends and confidants, and even cataclysm doesn’t break the bond.That is most obvious in the series’ treatment of World War I. The new season opens in the centennial of the war’s start, and, in real life at least, 100 years have not erased the horror of that war or fully repaired the damage it did to the modern psyche.On “Downton Abbey,” though, the “war to end all wars” was briskly fought and won in Season 2, and the consequences are barely felt a few years later.Matthew Crawley (Dan Stevens), who was briefly paralyzed by an injury while fighting in the trenches, was killed in a car crash at the end of Season 3; the writers had to accommodate the actor’s decision to leave the show. And that allowed for a fresh series of romances for his widow, Lady Mary (Michelle Dockery). Mary complains about all the men in her generation who were killed or maimed in the war, but those casualties somehow don’t restrict her social life. In the new season, several handsome, wealthy and well-born suitors who survived the war mentally and physically intact show up, eager to propose.Progress and change are flagged by a Singer sewing machine, a motorbike and estate taxes, but very little actually affects the Downton way of life. The Earl of Grantham’s wife, Cora (Elizabeth McGovern), is American, which allows the writers to insert events that serve as historical milestones — and frankly, filler — for viewers less familiar with the policies of Prime Minister David Lloyd George. This season, Cora’s brother becomes tangentially involved in the Teapot Dome scandal.“Downton Abbey” is long past its sell-by date, yet is still remarkably palatable. It’s a variant of “Saving Mr. Banks,” the Disney movie about how Walt Disney mollified P. L. Travers and made an American movie musical of her classic children’s book, “Mary Poppins.” PBS could just as easily concoct a film about the Disneyfication of the English class system: The Wonderful World of Julian Fellowes.