CHENNAI, India —  Rarely have tears of despair flowed so copiously at a swearing-in ceremony as they did last week, when officials in the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu prepared to govern without Jayalalithaa Jayaram, an iron-fisted leader known as Amma, or Mother, who has been sentenced to four years in prison on corruption charges.After taking the podium, the man who will replace Ms. Jayaram as the chief minister of Tamil Nadu pulled a photograph of her out of his shirt pocket, bowed reverently and began to weep. (“Soaked hankie takes the brunt,” read a headline in The Telegraph the next day.) The housing and urban development minister was sobbing so uncontrollably that her oath was barely audible. The minister of handlooms and textiles was said to have “wailed.”If this sounds melodramatic, that is a matter of perspective. On the day the verdict was read, a 58-year-old electrician named Venkateshan walked out of the shop where he had been watching the news coverage all morning, soaked himself with gasoline and set himself on fire, shouting, “My Amma has failed in the court,” according to the police inspector who investigated the death.Huge posters have appeared on the streets showing Ms. Jayaram’s face and the image of a broken chain, with the words, “How can a human being punish a god?”In a country that has long tolerated brazen corruption in its regional leaders, Ms. Jayaram’s conviction will stand as a benchmark. Despite her wealth, power and friendship with Prime Minister Narendra Modi, she has become the first sitting state leader to come under a new, tough Supreme Court ruling that bars her from remaining in office while appealing a conviction, as officials here have done for decades. And she is barred from running for office for 10 years, bad news for a woman of 66.Now in her third term as chief minister, she is at the blazing height of her popularity; her party, the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, won a remarkable 37 of the state’s 39 parliamentary seats in spring elections. Last week, most people in Chennai expressed serene confidence that she could maintain political control, even if it meant running the state from a jail cell. Her lieutenants, whether out of love or fear, were jockeying to prove their fealty. Her voters were passionate in her defense, saying the verdict was driven by a political vendetta.“They are panicked,” said A. S. Panneerselvan, the reader’s editor for The Hindu, a daily newspaper based in Chennai, the capital of Tamil Nadu. “Behind the bravado is actually a very, very hopeless reality that they don’t know what their next step is going to be. This is something they were not mentally prepared for. The reality is that your electoral fortunes are different from your legal fortunes.”That Ms. Jayaram enriched herself in office should not come as a complete surprise.In 1995, during a period when she professed to earn a salary of 1 rupee per month, she staged an opulent waterfront wedding for her foster son that included 40,000 guests and a formal sit-down dinner for 12,800, according to court documents. An imperious leader, she terrified her underlings, who, during her early days in office, would regularly stretch facedown on the ground and touch her feet. Multistory images of her face were erected throughout the state capital; an American diplomat, in a cable published by WikiLeaks, recalled one that was captioned “Amma is God.”Subramanian Swamy, a onetime confidant who went on to file the corruption charges against Ms. Jayaram, said she seemed to be compensating for brutal treatment that she suffered as a teenage girl, thrust into working as a film actress in Kollywood, Tamil Nadu’s homegrown film industry.“Suddenly everything was at her command, and she went berserk,” he said. “She really thought she was going to be the queen of India.”Mr. Swamy, then the leader of the Janata Party, filed a case against his former friend in 1996, after she lost a bid to serve a second term. He alleged that, after coming to power with little wealth, she had illegally accumulated 660 million rupees, or about $10 million, during her first term, funneling large sums of money through a series of shell companies. A search of her home at the time found that she possessed more than 10,000 saris and some 66 pounds of gold, matter-of-factly itemized under headings such as “one gold waist belt studded with 2,389 diamonds, 18 emeralds and nine rubies weighing 2.3 pounds.”But the case inched its way forward through a blizzard of delays and motions. After winning election a second time, Ms. Jayaram returned as chief minister in 2002. In the decision released on Sept. 27, Judge John Michael Cunha noted that after she regained her office, the accused recalled 76 prosecution witnesses, and that “64 of them casually, without any rhyme or reason, backtracked from their earlier version,” including a high-ranking police official, a development he called “amazing and shocking.”A turning point came in 2003, when India’s Supreme Court granted prosecutors a change of venue to neighboring Karnataka State, something Ms. Jayaram’s political rivals had pursued. Mr. Cunha concluded his 1,136-page ruling with a quotation from former Vice President Al Gore, that “if political and economic freedoms have been siblings in the history of liberty, it is incestuous coupling of wealth and power that poses the deadliest threat to democracy.”“Heady mix of power and wealth is the bottom line of this case,” the judge wrote.The verdict, which included a fine of $16 million, clearly came as a jolt to the party faithful. After the flamboyance of her first term, Ms. Jayaram had become more careful, and for all her imperiousness, Tamil Nadu is a well-run state. The poor have benefited greatly from a flotilla of public welfare programs she has introduced: Nutritious meals are available for a few pennies at “Amma canteens,” subsidized medications at “Amma pharmacies,” to say nothing of “Amma salt,” “Amma water,” “Amma cinema” and “Amma cement.”Lakshmi Shrika, 40, lived next door to the electrician who self-immolated, and she shook her head in bafflement when asked about his act. She, too, has a soft spot for the jailed leader, whom she called “a very bold female.” Under Ms. Shrika’s table was one of the party’s famous freebies: a new food processor emblazoned with Ms. Jayaram’s face.Still, she said that she had been shocked by the reaction of her mother’s friends, whom she overheard saying that the judge and his family should be killed.“They are so angry, so aggressive,” she said. “Older people, they have taken it to their heart. They are more devoted.”It was hard to say how many people had committed suicide over Ms. Jayaram’s conviction; by the middle of the week, officials from her party had a list of 37, but the circumstances were impossible to independently confirm. Some officials seemed to be counting heart attacks. After the death of the party’s founder, the matinee idol Marudhur Gopalan Ramachandran, dozens of suicides were reported; skeptics in Chennai said that the party incentivized such acts with payments to surviving family members.The Times of India reported the self-immolation on Thursday of a 23-year-old woman in a village in the southern part of the state who doused herself with gasoline after putting her baby daughters to sleep. She was in serious condition, with burns on 60 percent of her body. Family members told the newspaper that she had spoken of little but the verdict since Saturday.On Wednesday, a group of followers lighted candles and chanted over Mr. Ramachandran’s grave, which overlooks the Bay of Bengal, and a thin, gray-haired woman beat on her breast with her fists. “Today, our madam is in jail,” said their leader, a lawyer named N. Nevalinathan. “We ask our god to help us overturn all obstacles.”In an interview after the ceremony, he called Ms. Jayaram “a living god.” He said he could fully understand why her admirers might consider suicide.“You see, they do it for love, because of affection,” he said. “If there is ever a situation in which the mother is gone, all of her children are left in the road.”