KABUL, Afghanistan —  Seemingly endless squabbles are interrupted by full-scale shouting matches. Campaign aides mutter suspiciously about what foreign visitors might be up to. And ballot boxes are piling up, waiting to be cracked open and examined for signs of fraud.In two spartan, stifling warehouses on the edge of Kabul, hundreds of Afghans, Americans and Europeans are engaged in a last-ditch attempt to salvage an acceptably democratic result from an election dispute that has been tumbling toward a street fight, or worse.They are auditing all of the roughly eight million ballots cast in last month’s presidential runoff, trying to separate fraud from fact. But a week into the process, the audit has engendered little confidence, and is already desperately behind schedule.Only 4.5 percent of the roughly 22,000 ballot boxes had been examined by Wednesday. Each day has seemed to yield some new dispute or confusion that has put on the brakes. Does writing “insh’allah” — God willing — next to the name of a candidate on a ballot constitute a legitimate vote? Is it proper for campaign representatives to move between tables, urging colleagues to argue harder? And who was that tall, bearded foreigner with no badge?On Wednesday, the audit was suspended outright for the second time in seven days so that Afghan and Western officials and representatives of the rival campaigns could hash out the rules under which the auditing is supposed to be conducted — rules that were supposed to have been established a week ago. Western and Afghan officials said this should allow the audit to resume Thursday at a speedier pace.In the balance is an election that opened almost four months ago with the encouraging sight of millions of Afghans turning out to vote despite bad weather and the threat of Taliban violence.With the American troop withdrawal looming, and worries about Afghanistan’s long-term stability, international officials had hoped for a widely accepted result that would give democracy a boost and help cement a positive legacy for the long and costly Western involvement here.But the election went badly off the rails after the June 14 runoff. One candidate, Abdullah Abdullah, almost immediately began accusing his rival, Ashraf Ghani, of widespread fraud, and then presented what he called evidence of collusion with election officials to rig the vote.By the start of last week, some of Mr. Abdullah’s most powerful and well-armed supporters were preparing to install their man as president by force, if necessary.Fearing Afghanistan was on the verge of fracturing, President Obama called both candidates, and Secretary of State John Kerry made an emergency trip here to broker a deal between Mr. Abdullah and Mr. Ghani. They both agreed to an audit of all the votes, and pledged that the winner would form a national unity government.The two candidates hugged for the television cameras at a late night news conference to announce the deal, and they have since met privately.But substantive talks on the political side of the deal have not yet begun, leaving many powerful Afghans who had been promised jobs by one side or the other to anxiously obsess over their fates.Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah, in the meantime, have refused to publicly release the details of what precisely they agreed to. They instead have been spinning the deal in the terms most palatable to their respective supporters, renewing concerns about whether the results of the audit would be accepted by the losing side’s supporters.But first there must be a winner, and the focus right now is the audit.“Chaotic” seems to have emerged as the description of choice among Western observers who are trying to be diplomatic about the audit. Among those with less discretion, the word “mess,” coupled with various adjectives, has been more common.On Tuesday, for instance, two staff members from rival campaigns almost came to blows, shouting and pointing in each other’s face only moments before Ambassador James B. Cunningham and the American special envoy here, James F. Dobbins, arrived for a tour of the audit warehouses.Down the middle of each building is a wide walkway separating two parallel rows of plastic tables and chairs. At each table, Afghan election officials, international observers and agents from both campaigns are tasked with opening ballot boxes and looking for signs of fraud.It is laborious work that is made even harder by the suffocating heat inside the warehouses, which are little more than bare aluminum sheets wrapped over frames anchored to concrete floors. There is no air-conditioning, there are precious few fans, and drinking water is taboo for everyone — it is Ramadan, and the foreigners do not want to risk offending their Afghan colleagues, who are fasting all through the day.For those seeking a sip of water or a cigarette, the bathrooms have proved an invaluable haven.The boxes that do not pass muster are supposed to be flagged so that senior Afghan electoral officials can decide whether to invalidate the votes. But that would require an agreement on what kind of fraud should result in disqualification, and such an accord has not yet been worked out.Until Wednesday’s suspension, there were also disputes about what constitutes evidence of fraud, and the confusion was the source of much of the disorder that has reigned since the audit began.Western and Afghan officials said that the audit was to restart on Thursday, and that they believed all sides had reached an understanding of how it would proceed, with limits placed on how many campaign representatives could be at any given table at the same time.“Are we all in agreement?” said a Western official who took part in the meetings. “I don’t know if anyone is ever entirely in agreement — we have seen no evidence of that at any point. But we are close enough, it appears.”To be fair, the audit is an enormous undertaking, and no one had any idea it would be needed until it was announced, at which point it was given just two days to start. It took four.Hundreds of foreign observers are being brought in to help, each of whom requires housing and security. Western embassies have all been pressing staff into the effort.The delays already appear to be upsetting President Hamid Karzai, who is said to be increasingly agitated by the growing international role in the election.“President Karzai never asked for U.S. involvement, nor have we welcomed it,” said Aimal Faizi, a spokesman for the president, in an electronic message sent late Tuesday.“The president accepted it as a ‘bitter pill’ in order to avoid more complications for Afghans as they have been waiting impatiently for months for their new president.”