The stock market came back from an early sell-off on Monday and ended with modest losses in another day of choppy trading.Some investors wondered whether stock prices had moved too high. And the pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong, a world financial center, added to the geopolitical concerns on investors’ minds.“You have a ton of risks that have brought back in the market’s focus,” said Brad McMillan, chief investment officer for Commonwealth Financial. “There’s just a heck of a lot of uncertainty right now.”The Dow Jones industrial average lost 41.93 points, or 0.3 percent, to close at 17,071.22. In the opening minutes of trading, the Dow was down as much as 178 points, or more than 1 percent.The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index lost 5.05 points, or 0.3 percent, to 1,977.80. The Nasdaq composite index slipped 6.34 points, or 0.1 percent, to 4,505.85.The market has turned choppy in recent weeks, flipping between solid gains and steep losses. Since hitting a record on Sept. 18, the S.&P. 500 has slipped 1.7 percent. Coming after a calm summer, the slide has set off many worried calls to brokerage firms.John Canally, chief economic strategist at LPL Financial, said many investors thought the market had gone too long without a major fall. “I can’t tell you how many calls we’re getting now asking, ‘Is this it? Is this the big one?’ ” he said.A reason for the recent turbulence is that the stock market appears “priced for perfection,” Mr. McMillan said. That is an increasingly common saying among investors, and it means the S.&P. 500 is so high that corporate profits and the economy have to keep improving just to sustain current prices.“The question is no longer, are we doing well? It’s, are we doing even better?” he said. “When you pay for perfection, anything shy of that is a disappointment.”At current prices, investors are paying $16.69 for every dollar in company earnings, according to data from FactSet. That is 10 percent above the long-term average. “There’s a certain amount of faith needed at this level,” Mr. McMillan said.Traders have pushed the stock market lower despite a string of encouraging economic news. The latest came from the Commerce Department, which reported on Monday that consumer spending rose 0.5 percent in August. It was further evidence that the economy was on solid footing heading into the end of the year.“The consumer is back in the driver’s seat where they should be, moving the economy ahead at what looks like a strong 3 percent pace,” said Chris Rupkey, chief financial economist at the Bank of Tokyo, in a note to clients. “Somebody please tell the stock market. Can’t ask more of the economy than that.”Among the stocks on the move, DreamWorks Animation, the studio behind “Shrek” and “Madagascar,” soared $5.82, or 26 percent, to $28.18 after reports that SoftBank of Japan is in talks to buy the company.Ford was the biggest loser in the S.&P. 500, dropping $1.22, or 7.5 percent, to $15.11. The automaker warned that it would fall short of its full-year profit goals.NiSource surged $2.26, or 5.9 percent, to $40.84 after the energy company said it planned to split off its natural gas pipeline business into a stand-alone company.In the bond market, interest rates declined. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note fell to 2.48 percent, from 2.53 percent Friday. Its price rose 13/32, to 99 3/32.