Oslo is withdrawing its bid for the 2022 Winter Olympics, and as difficult as it once would have been to believe, the contest to host those Games appears to be reduced to a dark-horse race between Beijing and Almaty, Kazakhstan.“The I.O.C. is guaranteed a dictatorship,” said David Wallechinsky, the president of the International Society of Olympic Historians.This is a winter-shed moment for the International Olympic Committee; one that should not come as a shock but should be a cattle prod to broad and meaningful change.In a normal bidding cycle, both Beijing and Almaty would have been long shots, and not simply because of their dubious internal politics.Asia already has the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea, and the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo. It is hardly in a global movement’s best interests to give a third straight Games to the same continent.Beijing hosted the Summer Olympics in 2008, and it is hardly in a global movement’s best interests to give the Chinese capital — less than a generation later — the Winter Olympics as well when the pollution count in Beijing remains a lot higher than its mountains (the skiing events would be held 125 miles to the northwest in Zhangjiakou).As for Almaty, Kazakhstan’s biggest city, it might well have been a worthwhile candidate a decade from now. It has a relatively compact Olympic plan and a developing winter sports culture. It staged the Winter Asian Games in 2011, has an Olympic bronze medalist, the men’s figure skater Denis Tan, and will stage the Winter Universiade in 2017.But the I.O.C. just finished its big, fraught and extremely expensive developmental gamble with the Sochi Games in Russia last February. Why roll the dice again on Almaty, particularly when Human Rights Watch considers Kazakhstan’s record poor and the I.O.C. just finished thrusting and parrying its way through President Vladimir V. Putin’s games in Sochi?What most I.O.C. members should want and surely do want after recent adventures and misadventures is a Winter Olympic return to the traditional power base of winter sports; a return to a safer haven where skiing and skating, not repression, could be the clear focus of attention.That should have meant Europe, but the Europeans — from Munich to Krakow to Stockholm to Oslo — all have bailed out.There have been deep concerns, in a relatively stagnant European economy, about costs; fears driven by Sochi’s total price tag of $51 billion (its operational budget was much, much lower). There have been deep concerns about white elephants and environmental impact and, particularly in Oslo’s case, there has been disenchantment with the I.O.C. and its recent messages and choices.“We are winter sports people, but this also shows we have brains and can see the bigger picture, and I think the Norwegian people should be proud of that,” said Kjersti Buaas, a Norwegian snowboarder and four-time Olympian who competed in Sochi. “I don’t see this as a thing we’re missing out on. I rather see it as an opportunity to take a stand against a big, big organization that not many people take a stand against. And that’s the only way things are going to change.”Buaas thinks her country was too divided on the Olympics to justify going ahead with the bid. But the Olympics might also have changed for the better and the greener if the Norwegians had decided to stage the Games and influence from within — as they did at the enchanting 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer.Oslo 2022 presented some challenges that Lillehammer did not. The Alpine ski areas would have been a two-hour journey from the host city. But those are nothing to the challenges that Almaty and Beijing present.“The Western Europeans saying no is clearly a wake-up call, and we need to do something about it,” said Gerhard Heiberg, the Norwegian I.O.C. member who was head of the Lillehammer Olympic Organizing Committee and was a prime mover behind the Oslo bid.But as Heiberg points out, the I.O.C. already was discussing plenty of change before Oslo’s decision. The new I.O.C. president Thomas Bach, with his Agenda 2020 initiative, is leading a serious attempt to rethink the bidding process and the Olympic sports program. The proof, of course, is in the revising, not the rethinking, but the wind does seem to be blowing toward lowering costs and focusing much harder on legacy issues — as well as working with prospective cities before they bid instead of simply judging them after they bid.The last time the I.O.C. had two or fewer candidates for an Olympics was for the 1984 Summer Games, when only Los Angeles was left to choose from. But it is also worth noting that the current bidding debacle does not apply to the Summer Olympics.The field for the next available Summer Games in 2024 looks robust so far (and much longer on democracy). Among the seriously interested: Paris, which would be celebrating the centennial of its staging of the 1924 Games; and four American cities: San Francisco, Los Angeles, Boston and Washington.“What’s fascinating is that people are almost stepping over each other still to try to host the Summer Olympics, but the Winter Olympics are having a harder and harder time,” Wallechinsky said. “You won’t truly know if it’s a crisis until you get the bids for the next Winter Olympics in 2026. But there’s no doubt it’s a disturbing trend.”The global impact of a Winter Games is clearly less powerful. The number of major cities in reach of mountains big enough to stage a downhill is also limited. Climate change is beginning to be an impediment and will only be more of one in the cycles (and bidding cycles) ahead.There have been calls for the I.O.C. to delay the 2022 vote, scheduled for July 2015 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to allow for new options and candidates to surface. But Bach has ruled out, for now, any changes to the process or timeline.That seems only fair. How would the I.O.C. justify moving the goal posts on Almaty and Beijing after they have played by the rules and deadlines so far?But being left with a short list that is too short remains far from optimal. The I.O.C. does indeed appear to be guaranteed a dictatorship, and how it reacts from here is critical.