Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Police departments on alert.Law enforcement officials are enacting precautions nationwide after two patrolmen sitting in their car in Brooklyn were killed at point-blank range on Saturday.Though there was no evidence of imminent threats, officers are being warned to wear bulletproof vests and not make inflammatory posts on social media.The suspect in the killings, who later turned the gun on himself, had had multiple arrests and spent at least two years in prison.• North Korea vs. U.S.Officials angry about an American accusation of hacking are refusing to take part in a U.N. Security Council meeting today where the country’s human rights situation will be discussed for the first time.They have warned of “serious consequences” if the U.S. retaliates against the computer breach on Sony Pictures, an attack that North Korea denies doing.And Sony denied reports it is planning to release the movie at the heart of the conflict, “The Interview,” free on its own streaming service, saying it was “still exploring options for distribution.”• The Western White House.President Obama and his family are on vacation this week in Hawaii.He said Sunday that he did not consider the cyberattack on Sony Pictures to be an act of war.• Tunisia’s transition.A veteran statesman who served in the governments of both of Tunisia’s former dictators was confirmed today as the winner of Sunday’s presidential runoff.The vote represents the final stage of the country’s move to democracy and the first peaceful transfer of power stemming from the Arab Spring revolutions.• Court hearing on immigration.A sheriff from Arizona and a conservative lawyer who once said Mr. Obama falsely claimed U.S. citizenship are seeking today to stop the president’s order sparing five million people from deportation.Separately, young immigrants protected from deportation under policies implemented in 2012 can begin to pursue driver’s licenses today in Arizona.• Trial for a princess.A court ruled today that the sister of the king of Spain, Princess Cristina, must face a tax fraud trial.It will be the first time a member of the modern royal family is put on trial.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks  are rising. European shares are up, and Asian indexes closed strongly higher.• UPS says it is primed for its biggest package delivery day of the year today, hoping to avoid last year’s snafus. FedEx and the U.S. Postal Service had their peak day on Dec. 15.• China’s Parliament is considering banning most tobacco advertising in the world’s top consumer of cigarettes, state media reported today.OVER THE WEEKEND• Israeli strikes hit the Gaza Strip, the first air attack since the summer’s 50-day conflict that killed about 2,100 Palestinians and 70 Israelis. The army said it was in response to rocket fire.• The United States transferred four prisoners to Afghanistan from Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. Similar moves are expected in the coming weeks.• President Raúl Castro declared victory for the Cuban Revolution in a speech that made both conciliatory and combative statements toward the U.S.• The operator of Japan’s devastated Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant removed radioactive fuel rods from the most vulnerable of the four heavily damaged reactor buildings.• Box office winner: “The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies” collected $90.6 million in ticket sales during its first five days, slightly better than the five-day total for last year’s “Hobbit” installment.• Elton John and his longtime partner, David Furnish, converted their civil partnership to a marriage.• TV recaps: “Homeland” and “The Affair” aired their season finales.NOTEWORTHY• Booking their playoff tickets.The Green Bay Packers, Pittsburgh Steelers and Dallas Cowboys are headed to the postseason after victories on Sunday.Tonight, the Denver Broncos (11-3) are at the Cincinnati Bengals (9-4-1) at 8:30 Eastern on ESPN.• In Spain, they’re in it to win it.Spaniards are crossing their fingers for world’s richest lottery, drawn today. The $2.74 billion pot from El Gordo (“The Fat One”) is divided among thousands of winners, rather than going to a single ticket holder.• Top college player cleared.Jameis Winston, Florida State’s quarterback and the 2013 Heisman Trophy winner, was cleared of violating the university’s student code of conduct after a campus hearing on a 2012 rape accusation.He is set to take part in a College Football Playoff semifinal on Jan. 1 when the Seminoles take on Oregon in the Rose Bowl.• Madonna’s early gift.The pop icon has responded to the online leak of previously unheard songs by releasing six tracks from her coming album, “Rebel Heart.”• Heroes.The Carnegie Heroes awards, which began in 1904 and honor those who risk their lives for others, announced their winners today.BACK STORYThey’re not the chestnuts of the quintessential Christmas song, but hazelnuts can hold their own during the holidays, wrapped inside chocolates, cookies and other confections.They’re pricier this year, though. Most of the global crop grows on trees along the Black Sea in Turkey. In March, hailstorms and frost destroyed many of the hazelnut blossoms and nearly doubled the wholesale price.Still, that’s good for Oregon farmers, who produce 99 percent of the U.S. supply and 5 percent of the global total.Then there’s Nutella. No one buys up more of the planet’s hazelnuts (about 25 percent) than its Italian makers. They need more than 50 nuts for each 13-ounce jar of the spread.Nutella was born in another time of shortage. During World War II, a chocolatier experimented with ground hazelnuts to mix with hard-to-find cocoa. He then made it creamy.If you find yourself with plenty of hazelnuts, our friends at NYT Cooking have 139 recipes using the ingredient.Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.Want to get the briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.