Donald J. Trump has done it, calling for the return of the death penalty in New York and “a little backbone” in American foreign policy. Cindy Crawford and Richard Gere did it, proclaiming themselves, despite tabloid rumors to the contrary, “very married.” It remains the mass protest medium of choice for political organizations (gay Republicans vs. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel), professional groups (disaffected authors vs. Amazon) and even corporations (Walmart vs. the world).Add the Bay Ridge United Methodist Church at Fourth Avenue and Bay Ridge Parkway in Brooklyn to the list.It is a storied tradition, buying a chunk of newspaper space to get a message out to the public. But the half-page ad taken out in an issue of The New York Times last month by this small church congregation, titled “The Economic Well-Being Award,” recalls an earlier era of civic participation: It is looking for answers, not supplying them. And the middle-class congregants — nurses and firefighters and retirees — seek nothing less than the key to American economic prosperity.Leading off with a side-by-side comparison of economic data from 1946 to 1971 and 1972 to 2012, the ad offers $33,000 to any economist who can explain why the economy was so much stronger in the post-World War II period than after 1972.“In the spirit of democracy and American pragmatism,” it reads, “the principles and policies we use to achieve our goals” (namely, “an economically secure, well-informed, compassionate, and healthy population”) “should be based on, and their success should be measured by, facts — rather than the ideological preferences such as liberalism, conservatism, libertarianism, and socialism, that currently divide us.”Lest you wonder why a church with a few dozen members is plunging into such worldly matters, the ad said that broadly shared economic wealth squares with Jesus’ teachings on the value of “the well-being of every person, the entire social body, all creatures, and the land, air, and water that sustain life on earth.”That line of thinking began with the early-morning musings of the church’s pastor, the Rev. Robert Emerick, who said recently that he was trying to sort through the punditry in the run-up to the 2012 presidential election when he realized he could not separate fact from bluster.“I just realized that if I didn’t know any better or couldn’t know any better, I’d be stuck basically making a psychological choice, not a rational choice,” Mr. Emerick said. “That’s not O.K. Not when we’re talking about people’s lives and jobs and the country’s future.”(Or as Karen McGivern, one of the church’s lay leaders and a nurse from Bensonhurst, put it: “Should taxes be higher or lower? You know, who knows? Is there even an answer? And if there isn’t an answer, then everybody should just stop lying about it.”)In the hours around dawn for nearly a year, the pastor began reading up on economic history. He combed through reams of economic data culled from government databases. He started preaching about how Americans had been better off in the postwar years, with more people sharing in the general wealth.Sundays took on a tinge of Economics 101.Then came the idea of offering $33,000 from the proceeds of the sale of the church’s previous, historic building, known as the Green Church, in 2009.“I said: What? You want to do what?” Ms. McGivern recalled. (Besides the prize money, the newspaper ad cost $18,000.)It did not take long for her to come around, though a committee of congregants had several meetings to debate the prize and whether any money should be attached before a majority vote established the award.The Methodist congregation has been sharing space with a Lutheran church since selling the old church after deciding it did not have the money to maintain the building, let alone repair it. Construction on a planned new church has not yet begun; congregants said the money for the award would not come out of the building fund.As economics prizes go, $33,000 is not much. Still, Mr. Emerick said he had received about a dozen responses from economists. There is no deadline or minimum (or maximum) length; in fact, Mr. Emerick envisions something of a long-term project. The knottier challenge will be the church’s main stated requirement — an answer free of ideological bias.According to David B. Sicilia, an economic historian at the University of Maryland, economists generally agree on a few contributors to postwar prosperity. They include money flowing into the economy from the government, which built up the infrastructure, and from consumers, who had had few places to spend their income during the war years; a tax policy favorable to the middle class; and Cold War military spending. But it is hard to say what the main factor was or why exactly things broke down later.“We want to think that the ’50s and ’60s were the ‘real America,’ and the ’70s and ’80s were an exception,” Mr. Sicilia said. “But it’s a really good question now, because we’ve been in a period of pretty slow growth for quite some time.”Besides, he pointed out, there is no telling whether what worked in 1950 would work in 2014.And yet. “It’s an important question, because the discipline of economics has failed us,” said Chris Sturr, the co-editor of Dollars & Sense, a left-leaning magazine about economics issues, a group of whose contributors is planning to enter the contest. For Ms. McGivern, who has seen her friends become unemployed, her patients’ medical costs surge and her children struggle to find jobs after college, the question is simpler, but no less urgent.“How,” she said, “have things gotten out of whack here?”