Welcome to the Morning Briefing on NYT Now. (Download us for iPhone.)Here’s what you need to know to start your day:• Too close to call in Mississippi.Senator Thad Cochran appears headed for a runoff with State Senator Chris McDaniel, a Tea Party-backed challenger.With 99 percent of the vote counted, they each had about 49 percent, with a third candidate pulling in less than 2 percent.Mr. Cochran, 76, was considered the most vulnerable among old-guard Republicans in the Senate this year.• Heavy security in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square.On the 25th anniversary of the military’s crackdown on protesters there, Chinese authorities are ensuring that there is no public acknowledgment of the occasion.But there are events around the world. A nighttime candlelight vigil in Hong Kong is expected to attract 200,000 people.The Times is live-blogging the events.• Obama’s foreign policy speech.In an address at a public rally in Warsaw today, the president linked Poland’s pro-democracy struggle 25 years ago to those in Ukraine today.Earlier, he met with Ukraine’s new president. President Obama is due to meet with the Group of 7 nations in Brussels later.• How many countries belong here?Mr. Obama then heads to the summit meeting of the Group of 7 industrialized economies, which begins in Brussels today.The forum was to be held in Sochi. But Russia was left out and the meeting moved after the Russians’ annexation of Crimea.While it won’t be represented, Russia and its activities in Ukraine will certainly be a main topic of discussion.• Euro zone nations to expand.European authorities officially approved Lithuania to adopt the euro on Jan. 1.It will be the 19th country, and the last Baltic state, to do so.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks are down, as are European indexes. Asian shares closed mixed.• The Federal Reserve issues its Beige Book this afternoon, a survey with anecdotal evidence on the nation’s economic activity from the 12 Fed districts.Yes, it has a beige cover. Binyamin Appelbaum, our reporter who follows the Fed, explains today how it came to be.NOTEWORTHY• A great excuse for a country music concert.The actress Kristen Bell hosts the fan-voted CMT Music Awards extravaganza, with performances by Blake Shelton, Miranda Lambert and Carrie Underwood, with a little R&B thrown in from Jason Derulo (live on CMT, 8 p.m. Eastern).• The trouble with horse racing.“60 Minutes Sports,” on Showtime, looks at turmoil in the racing industry over investigations into neglect, abuse and drugging of horses, a report that comes three days before the Belmont Stakes, the last leg of the Triple Crown.• Airline passengers can rejoice, a little.A new $4.1 billion Terminal 2 opens today at Heathrow Airport in London, replacing an overcrowded building from the 1950s.Queen Elizabeth II opened that one, and she’ll do the same today. But travel experts say Heathrow needs a third runway to truly relieve delays.• A free lunch that comes at a price. A “pestaurant” opens for a day in Washington, serving free grasshopper burgers, barbecue mealworms and scorpion lollipops for charity.It’s a public relations stunt brought to you by a pest-control company. There are 13 other pestaurants doing the same in 11 other countries.• Ghost busting.“Spooked,” a new four-episode online comedy about a squabbling, bumbling team of paranormal investigators, is produced by Bryan Singer, the director and a producer of “X-Men: Days of Future Past.”“The better jokes — and that’s a relative assessment — require a working knowledge of M. Night Shyamalan films and British sci-fi icons,” writes our TV critic Mike Hale (1 p.m. Eastern, Hulu Plus; and Geek & Sundry channel on YouTube).• Your World Cup dreams in reach.A few hours ago, 180,000 tickets spread across all 64 games in Brazil became available.Soccer’s governing body, FIFA, had held back the seats, fearing that four stadiums might not be finished in time. It also released some unclaimed seats for the disabled.BACK STORYThirty years ago today, Bruce Springsteen’s “Born in the U.S.A.” album was released.It was a commercial juggernaut and a critical hit that became a political football.The lyrics of the title track were an angry critique of the poor treatment of Vietnam veterans.But President Ronald Reagan cited Mr. Springsteen’s patriotic optimism in his 1984 re-election campaign, to the rocker’s chagrin.A few days after that, Mr. Reagan’s rival, Walter Mondale, said Mr. Springsteen had endorsed him. Mr. Mondale’s staff members had to retract the claim — the Boss had kept his political statements pretty much to his music.By 2008, Mr. Springsteen made his politics quite public, endorsing Barack Obama that spring.Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m.Don’t miss Your Evening Briefing at 5 p.m.What would you like to see here? Email us at NYTNow@NYTimes.com.Follow us on Twitter: @NYTNow.