CAIRO —  Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, the former army field marshal who led last summer’s military takeover, won election as president with more than 90 percent of the vote, according to preliminary tallies Wednesday night. But it was the reported turnout that caught some by surprise.Officials said nearly 40 percent of the electorate had cast ballots, an unexpectedly strong showing after days of escalating panic in the government and the news media over the lack of voters at the polls.Supporters of Mr. Sisi had counted on a respectable turnout to legitimize his assumption of power after the ouster last summer of President Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt’s first fairly elected leader. But Mr. Sisi’s critics say the vote was so marred by irregularities that its outcome, including the turnout, was all but meaningless — except perhaps as the sign of a return to the era when strongmen like Hosni Mubarak won similarly predictable landslides.Mr. Sisi’s victory was never in doubt. A severely unbalanced and tightly restricted political process all but guaranteed it, driving away all but one opponent, Hamdeen Sabahi.Yet when Egyptians failed to show up in significant numbers for the scheduled two-day election on Monday and Tuesday, the military-backed government showed signs of desperation in its efforts to urge more people to the polls. Finally, as the scheduled two-day vote was about to end Tuesday night, election officials took the extraordinary step of adding a third day to the voting.The ultimate total was impossible to confirm independently. Mr. Sabahi abruptly withdrew all his monitors from the polls over the previous night, complaining that many were arrested or assaulted by the police for attempting to keep an eye on the ballots. Their pullout removed the last significant check on potential ballot stuffing.Around the same time, the website of the flagship state newspaper abruptly shifted to reporting “heavy turnout” in its banner headline even as private newspapers continued to report the opposite.“The state searches for a vote,” Al Masry Al Youm, a privately owned newspaper broadly supportive of Mr. Sisi, declared in its headline.“The ballot boxes searching for voters,” declared Al Shorouk, another private paper sympathetic to Mr. Sisi.In the pro-military newspaper Al Watan, an editorial faulted Mr. Sisi’s campaign organizers for the low turnout — accusing them of managing to bungle a race that was almost impossible to lose. “Today, it seems clear to all the Egyptian people that the Sisi campaign is the biggest failure in the history of the presidential elections,” the editorial declared. “They were arrogant and condescending toward the people, and they did not make any effort to mobilize voters, especially the youth.”When a state television anchor indicated Wednesday morning that a sudden “influx” of voters had pushed turnout in three provinces as high as 50 percent, Naguib Gebrael, a lawyer backing Mr. Sisi, brusquely contradicted her. “We can’t fool the people anymore now,” he said. “What influx?”The Sabahi campaign charged in a statement on Wednesday that the additional day of voting could serve no other purpose except “to interfere in the numbers and turnout.” The campaign said it had seen “a clear increase in the magnitude of the electoral violations,” including security forces excluding, expelling, assaulting or arresting Mr. Sabahi’s election monitors.Fourteen of its workers, the campaign said, were temporarily detained Tuesday evening as they left an organizing meeting — apparently accused of holding their gathering in violation of stringent new restrictions on assembly that were intended to deter public protests.The Interior Ministry said campaign workers had argued with poll officials.Mr. Sabahi said in another statement Wednesday that he had grave doubts about the integrity of the vote but would nonetheless stay in the race “for the interests of the nation.”Many in his campaign quit, however, and called on him to withdraw as well, arguing that the election had been irredeemably tainted.“States are not built on tyranny and rigging,” the student wing of the Sabahi campaign declared in a statement announcing its break with him for staying in the race. “We will not go back to Jan. 24, 2011,” the group said, referring to the last day before the revolt that forced Mr. Mubarak from power and promised a new democracy.The turnout, reported to be at about 40 percent, could grow as the count continues and might reach the roughly 50 percent of voters who cast ballots in the runoff that chose Mr. Morsi in 2012. But that comparison is deceptively uneven. That election was held over only two days instead of three and it was fiercely competitive. Nonetheless, the reported results suggested that Mr. Sisi received more votes than Mr. Morsi had in 2012, a crucial benchmark for demonstrating that Mr. Sisi is more popular than his predecessor.Nathan J. Brown, a political scientist at George Washington University who studies the Egyptian legal system, said in an email that because of “the weakness of international and domestic monitoring, there is no independent way to verify results.”The most effective checks on government fraud in previous Egyptian elections were parallel vote counts conducted by independent political movements, most notably the Muslim Brotherhood, which had the most effective national political network and built a track record of accurate reporting.But the government that ousted Mr. Morsi has outlawed and crushed the Brotherhood. Security forces have imprisoned its leaders and tens of thousands of their supporters, and killed more than 1,000 of them in street protests.