It is just a coincidence, but a remarkable one. The holiday of July Fourth is the anniversary not only of America’s birth but also of a spiritual rebirth in postwar Germany, and it is also the date of two races that are landmarks in the history of the world’s oldest automaker and in the annals of motorsports.The winning car from the first of those races still exists, and it still competes in vintage races. News of the second race was overshadowed by a sporting event whose significance went far beyond the endlines of the field where it was played.Independence Day 2014, besides being the 238th anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, is the centennial of the 1914 Grand Prix of the Automobile Club of France, considered by many experts to be most influential race in the history of the automobile.A week after the assassination of the Austro-Hungarian Archduke Franz Ferdinand and three weeks before the outbreak of World War I, a crowd estimated by newspapers of the time at more than 200,000 witnessed a seven-hour struggle between the technically advanced Peugeots and the five-car team of Mercedes.Forty years later to the day, the revived Formula One team of the German company — now Mercedes-Benz — made its postwar return in the 1954 French Grand Prix at Reims. The results, however, were all but lost under a national avalanche of emotion following West Germany’s upset victory over Hungary in the World Cup soccer final on the same day.The story begins in Lyon, France, where the only country to have a national grand prix before World War I staged the competition on public roads. First held in 1906, the French race was the series’ most important; the French auto industry was then Europe’s largest.Entry lists for the 1914 event show that the race drew 41 cars from 13 manufacturers: Daimler, Peugeot, Sunbeam, Delage, Opel, Fiat, Vauxhall, Alda, Nazzaro, Nagant, Aquilla-Italiana, Schneider and Picard-Pictet. At the start, 37 were waved off, two at a time, for a 20-lap contest around a 23.3-mile circuit.The Peugeots were the clear favorites, as they were racing in their home country and powered by one of the era’s most sophisticated engines. Its pioneering features included double overhead camshafts, hemispherical combustion chambers and four valves per cylinder. Peugeot had also for the first time added front-wheel brakes.The engine took Peugeot to victories in the Indianapolis 500 races of 1913 and 1916 and to wins in the French Grands Prix of 1912 and 1913. Peugeot also had Georges Boillot, generally considered to be the best driver, and Jules Goux, winner of the 1913 Indianapolis 500.The Mercedes team, led by the 1908 Grand Prix winner Christian Lautenschlager, had the advantage of a lightweight engine adapted from the company’s aircraft. The list of drivers included stars like Ralph DePalma, America’s greatest then, and Dario Resta of Britain, who would win the Indianapolis 500 in 1916. Lautenschlager hounded Boillot until the Frenchman’s chassis broke on the 18th lap, clearing the way for a 1-2-3 finish by Mercedes.The winning car was shipped to Mercedes’s London showroom. When the war began, the British aircraft authority commandeered it to study the engine — one detour on the trip to where it is today.Mercedes returned to racing prominence in the 1930s, notably with the Silver Arrow cars, but the outbreak of World War II again interrupted its run of successes.By 1954, Germans perceived racing as a way the country might demonstrate that it was ready to rejoin the international community and to reaffirm its technical prowess. The defeat by the Allies less than a decade earlier gave rise to a yearning for acceptance, or at least for recognition.The Marshall Plan of 1948 had given West Germany a kick-start into what was known as the Wirtschaftswunder, the economic miracle. Factories ran at full capacity with high demand for goods of all sorts, and at Mercedes there was a waiting list of more than two years for a new car. Prewar sales records set in 1938 were topped as early as 1950.Early in 1951, the Daimler chairman, Wilhelm Haspel, looking ahead, called his engineering staff together. Rudolf Uhlenhaut, the chief of passenger car engineering and a prewar racing team member, recalled Haspel’s instructions: “We must do sports again, but we don’t have any money. See what you can come up with.”Working nights, within six months Uhlenhaut’s people “came up with” a Teutonic hot rod powered by the 3-liter, 6-cylinder engine of the 300-series limousine introduced that year. The 115 horsepower of the sedan was raised to 177 and Uhlenhaut personally laid out the space-frame chassis, which was first thought to require doors that opened upward.The car was called the 300SL.These makeshift coupes won four of their five starts in 1952, winning at Le Mans, at the Nürburgring and in the Carrera Panamericana through Mexico. When the American Mercedes importer, Max Hoffman, saw the cars, he committed to 1,000 of them.The Gullwing was born, but there was more to come.New regulations for the World Drivers Championship took effect in 1954; Mercedes missed the first three races. When the W196 racecars finally made their debut in July, they looked to be a decade ahead of the opposition. Juan Manuel Fangio and Karl Kling, in the full-body streamliner versions, finished 1-2, an emphatic return to grand prix racing for Mercedes.Yet news of the win was nearly lost in the excitement of another German sports triumph some 300 miles to the southeast, in Bern, Switzerland.The West German people, roughly 48 million, were in a sort of limbo. Their country could be found on maps, but it almost didn’t exist in the minds of its citizens.In the last 40 years they had been citizens of a monarchy, a democracy, a dictatorship and now a democracy. West Germany didn’t have an army in 1954; it was dependent on its former enemy for protection. The country’s self-image was in dire need of a lift.Soccer would provide that.In a preliminary round of the 1954 World Cup, West Germany faced Hungary, the favorite, and in what would later prove to be a key move, the Germans played their substitutes. The final score, 8-3, accomplished two things: It made the Hungarians overconfident, and it showed the German coach, Sepp Herberger, that if his second-string players could score three times, the Hungarians were vulnerable.The strategy proved sound. Germany defeated Hungary in the final, 3-2.As the Süddeutsche Zeitung of Munich, one of the country’s leading newspapers, wrote in 2010, the victory was “the real founding date of the Federal Republic, more important than currency reform, the ratification of the Constitution or the destruction of the Berlin Wall.”The coincidences continue. On July 4, 2014, Germany is playing France in the World Cup quarterfinals, something of a rematch of Mercedes vs. Peugeot a century earlier.Mercedes-Benz, today the dominant power in Formula One, does not display the car that won the 1914 French Grand Prix at the corporate museum in Stuttgart.The white No. 28 car sits in a Eugene, Ore., garage, alongside the Mercedes that won the 1908 French Grand Prix and one of the Blitzen Benzes that set speed records in that long-ago era. It belongs to George F. Wingard, a gentleman collector who bought it from a British vintage-car dealer in 1984 when Daimler-Benz declined to meet the asking price.It took Mr. Wingard two years, in which he did practically all the mechanical work himself, to restore the car to a state as close as possible to its original condition.The trail from the finish line at Lyon to Eugene is a remarkable one, with the car being returned to its London showroom at the end of World War I, sold in 1920 and raced at the Brooklands track for several years. It was rebodied as a road car in 1923 and was still in that form when it was found in a suburban London garage in 1961.Of the seven grand prix cars built for 1914, three remain: the winner; a spare that sits in a Naples, Fla., museum; and one built of spare parts for display in the Daimler museum. The others met the all-too-common fate of old racecars and disappeared along the way.