House Republicans on Tuesday assailed President Obama’s unilateral actions on immigration, saying they were an unconstitutional overreach timed to circumvent the midterm elections that gave Republicans control of both houses of Congress.But in a morning hearing of the House Homeland Security Committee, Republicans did not appear to coalesce behind any unified strategy for challenging the president. The witness before the committee was Homeland Security Secretary Jeh C. Johnson, in his first appearance before Congress to defend Mr. Obama’s sweeping actions.The intensity of Republicans’ anger was signaled by the committee chairman, Representative Michael McCaul of Texas, who opened the hearing accusing Mr. Obama of “an unprecedented executive power grab” and an “end-run around Congress,” actions he said would “undermine the Constitution and threaten our democracy.”Mr. Johnson’s testimony revealed the political abyss between the administration and Republicans over the legality and impact of the White House actions. Mr. Johnson said the programs Mr. Obama announced on Nov. 20, which will provide protections from deportation and work permits to more than four million unauthorized immigrants, were “well within our legal authority.”“The reality is that, given our limited resources, these people are not priorities for removal,” Mr. Johnson said, adding that the immigrants would have to come forward, pass security background checks and pay taxes.“This is simple common sense,” Mr. Johnson said.Several Republicans criticized the president for waiting to act until after elections in which his party suffered broad setbacks.“The campaign is over, the Republicans win both houses of Congress and then the president issues this order,” said Peter T. King of New York. “I feel there was bad faith,” he said.Mr. Johnson said that Mr. Obama had told him to begin planning the actions last spring, but that they had delayed several times at the request of lawmakers trying to pass legislation, including the House speaker, John A. Boehner of Ohio.“We’ve done a lot of waiting,” Mr. Johnson said.The secretary said he had hoped to work with the House to pass legislation that would supersede Mr. Obama’s measures to provide permanent legal status for undocumented immigrants.“Unfortunately, since I’ve been in office we have not had a willing partner in the House of Representatives,” Mr. Johnson said.“This is not a permanent solution,” he said, but added: “We feel that we had no choice.”His comments infuriated Representative Jeff Duncan, Republican of South Carolina. “The American people want to see border security, they want deportations,” he said.“I think Congress can pass a bill when the American people see that the administration starts enforcing the laws that are already on the books,” Mr. Duncan said, banging his hand on the podium.The Republicans on the committee appeared to be testing different lines of legal attack on Mr. Obama’s measures, without settling on one.Some Republicans have proposed breaking out funding for the Department of Homeland Security from the budget Congress must pass before the end of the year. The secretary called that “a very bad idea for homeland security,” and said it would hobble his security efforts in many areas. For example, he said, he would not be able to pay for a new border detention center in Texas or hire new Secret Service agents for the coming presidential campaigns.Mr. Johnson pressed the lawmakers to approve $750 million in additional funding for 2015 for border detention facilities and surveillance technology.