TUNIS —  Secretary of State John Kerry made a surprise visit to Tunisia on Tuesday in a gesture of support for its effort to establish a democratic system.“We thought it was important to come to this country, which is struggling with this transition, in order to lend our support,” Mr. Kerry said after meeting with Tunisia’s caretaker prime minister, Mehdi Jomaa, and its president, Moncef Marzouki.While Mr. Kerry came to Tunisia to support its democratic transition, security appears to have been an important 
item on the agenda.Mr. Kerry’s visit was the first since militants stormed the United States Embassy here in September 2012, for which American officials have blamed Ansar al-Shariah, a terrorist organization. Cells of Islamic militants are still active.Mr. Kerry indicated that Tunisian officials had presented him with a list of equipment they are seeking for the nation’s security forces. He declined to give specifics of what Tunisian authorities had requested, but told reporters that the Obama administration would “evaluate it thoroughly with respect to effectiveness and capacity and appropriateness.”“There is some thought about training and assistance in other ways,” Mr. Kerry added, without providing details.Tunisia’s longtime ruler, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, was ousted in a popular uprising in 2011, and Tunisia was the first nation to elect a government as a result of the Arab Spring.There have been sharp divisions between the Islamist and secular communities in Tunisia. The nation has been racked by the assassinations of two secular politicians and by street protests. But in contrast to Syria, it has avoided descending into civil war. Unlike Egypt, its secular politicians have not tried to repress and imprison Islamists.As part of a political deal to pave the way for new elections, Tunisia’s Islamist former prime minister, Ali Larayedh of the political party Ennahda, resigned in January. Mr. Jomaa, who has a background in international business and previously served as the minister of industry, was chosen as an interim prime minister.Later that month, Tunisia’s National Constituent Assembly overwhelmingly approved a new Constitution that preserves democratic freedoms.The United States is providing more than $400 million in assistance since 2011. President Obama has invited Mr. Jomaa to visit Washington, and Mr. Kerry said that high-level meetings between Tunisian and American officials will be held when he does.Mr. Kerry was asked by reporters here what lessons Field Marshal Abdul-Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt might draw from Tunisia’s peaceful transfer of power. Mr. Kerry stirred controversy in August when he said that the Egyptian military had been “restoring democracy” after they ousted Mohamed Morsi, Egypt’s first freely elected president and a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood.Mr. Kerry said he would not offer advice to Field Marshal Sisi at a news conference, adding that he hoped to meet with him “in the next days or weeks.” Mr. Kerry also said that he planned to visit Algeria and Morocco in the coming months.After his meetings here, Mr. Kerry left for Paris. He is scheduled to meet this week with Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority, and with the Jordanian and French foreign ministers. Mr. Kerry has been trying to win Palestinian and Israeli support for a “framework” accord that would set the basic parameters of a comprehensive peace agreement.