Each week in Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books. This week, Adam Kirsch and Francine Prose discuss their favorite out-of-print books.By Adam KirschAlmost as soon as “Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man” was published, Thomas Mann became actively political.In the age of the Internet, it might not seem to matter much whether a book is technically out of print; almost anything can be downloaded, searched or, at a pinch, ordered through AbeBooks. Even so, for a book to be in print is a sign that it has not receded into history but remains part of our cultural present — that it still has something to say to us. By that measure, Thomas Mann scores fairly well. His masterpieces — “Buddenbrooks,” “The Magic Mountain,” “Doctor Faustus,” even the massive tetralogy “Joseph and His Brothers” — were all retranslated by John E. Woods in the 1990s and early aughts and remain in print. His more minor books have not been so fortunate, however, and Mann completists have to hunt down the old H. T. Lowe-Porter translations of titles like “Royal Highness.”If I had to pick one book by my favorite novelist to be reissued today, however, it would not be a novel at all, but a work of nonfiction: “Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man.” This book is such an anomaly in Mann’s oeuvre that even though it was originally published in 1918, it had to wait until 1983 for its first — and so far only — English-language translation. Yet it is one of his most fascinating productions, and one of the most illuminating books I know about the tangled question of the relationship of the artist to politics.Americans came to know Thomas Mann during World War II as the most important literary exile from Nazi Germany, a tireless champion of Western democracy against the evil that had taken over his country. During World War I, however, things were quite different. Like almost all German writers and intellectuals, Mann welcomed the outbreak of war in 1914 with passionate patriotic enthusiasm. While his brother, the novelist Heinrich Mann, declared his sympathy with the democratic West against authoritarian Germany, Thomas Mann was convinced that his artistic duty lay in supporting his country.With Mann things were never simple, however, and just how complicated his feelings about the war became can be gauged by the complexity and length of “Reflections.” Indeed, he gave up fiction for much of the war and spent years working on this collection of linked essays, which were published, ironically, just a few weeks before the German surrender. Mann’s argument is traduced by summarizing it, since the very hesitations and self-contradictions and evasions of the book constitute its real message. But at its core is the proposition that the artist can and must exist outside of politics, because he is devoted to values higher than politics. In the midst of an all-consuming war, and in the very act of supporting one side in that war, Mann claims the right to be nonpolitical.The book builds up an opposition between Germany and the West, particularly France, in which Germany stands for inwardness, irony, Protestantism and music, while France means eloquence, radicalism, democracy and universalism. His own artistic genius, Mann believes, calls him to the German side, while the French side is the home of the despicably shallow character Mann calls “civilization’s literary man” — who is also, not coincidentally, a portrait of his brother Heinrich. This personal element gives “Reflections” an almost sickly intensity, as Mann argues on behalf of his very right to exist as a writer in opposition to his older brother.The crowning irony of “Reflections” is that almost as soon as it was published, Mann was compelled by the logic of history to become actively political, and on the very same side as Heinrich. Mann famously came to believe that “in our time the destiny of man presents its meanings in political terms,” that there was no such thing, in the 20th century, as being nonpolitical. Today, at a time when our own literature can feel politically weightless, the record of Mann’s all-consuming struggle with his responsibility as an artist is the kind of book we need, as an example, an inspiration and a warning.Adam Kirsch is a senior editor at The New Republic and a columnist for Tablet. He is the author of two collections of poetry and several other books, including, most recently, “Why Trilling Matters.” In 2010, he won the Roger Shattuck Prize for Criticism.◆ ◆ ◆By Francine ProseI first heard of “On Trial” when Philip Roth read aloud from it, at the final class of a course on his work, in the 1990s.Over the past decade or so, many previously unavailable masterpieces have been brought back into print by savvy and heroic publishers, among them New York Review Books, Penguin and Melville House. The pleasure of seeing these volumes on the shelves is diminished only slightly by the realization that such works had been in need of rescue. And the happy consequence is that it’s harder to think of works that must be ordered on the Internet or searched for in used-book stores. But they still exist.My favorite out-of-print book is “On Trial,” published by Harper & Row in 1966. Introduced and translated by Max Hayward, it is a transcript of the show trial held in Moscow, in February 1966, at which Andrei Sinyavsky and Yuli Daniel were convicted of writing books and sending them abroad to be published with the express intention of undermining the government and the people of the Soviet Union, of criticizing and weakening its social and political system, and of abetting the imperialist enemies of the Revolution. The writers were charged with disseminating anti-Soviet propaganda masquerading as imaginative, satirical and humorous fiction.Though other literary figures had been imprisoned and executed by the Soviet government, this time the accusations against the writers (whose work had appeared under the pseudonyms Abram Tertz and Nikolai Arzhak) were based solely on what they had written. What’s striking is the eloquence, the intelligence and the calm rationality with which the two men mount a defense of literature as they attempt to address the prosecutor’s idiotic arguments and to correct the prosecution’s gross misreading of their work.No, their fictional characters are not stand-ins for their creators, nor are the opinions these characters express the sentiments of the authors. Sinyavsky is not himself advising the plan proposed by the vile lawyer in his novel “The Trial Begins,” a Swiftian suggestion that human embryos be processed and eaten like canned fish. And Daniel’s “This Is Moscow Speaking,” a story in which the government proclaims a day on which murder is legal, is not an incitement to terrorism, assassination and violence but rather a critique of, and a protest against, terrorism, assassination and violence. What makes the writers’ statements doubly moving is that although they pleaded their innocence, the outcome of the trial was clear before it began, and both men knew it. The only thing that had not yet been decided was the length of their prison terms: Sinyavsky was sentenced to seven years of hard labor, and Daniel to five.I first heard of this book when Philip Roth read aloud from it, at the final class of a course on his work that was taught by the novelist Norman Manea at Bard College in the 1990s. Open to the public, the session drew a crowd, and many students in the audience objected vociferously to Roth’s portrayal of women. Roth, who had been alerted in advance to the students’ complaints, quoted from “On Trial”: The writer is not his fictional creations, nor are their views his. To create a flawed female (or male) character does not mean that the writer intends to slander (a word of which the Soviet prosecutor was fond) all women or all men.Of course, no one was threatening Roth with a prison sentence, and though writers are routinely jailed in other countries, that is not the case here. Yet literature continues to be misread in the same ways that were used to justify the persecution of Sinyavsky and Daniel. Fiction is not autobiography, writers are not their characters, a fictional character is an individual and not a symbol of an entire gender or class or race, and one can criticize or satirize a society without being unpatriotic or seditious. Though the stakes are so much lower for us than they were in that Soviet courtroom, “On Trial” reminds us that the same conversations are still being held between the champions and the enemies of literature — and of freedom.Francine Prose is the author of 20 works of fiction and nonfiction, among them the novel “Blue Angel,” a National Book Award nominee, and the guide “Reading Like a Writer,” a New York Times best seller. Her new novel is “Lovers at the Chameleon Club, Paris 1932.” Currently a distinguished visiting writer at Bard College, she is the recipient of numerous grants and awards; a contributing editor at Harper’s, Saveur and Bomb; a former president of the PEN American Center; and a member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.