Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• The Ebola response.A second Dallas health worker tested positive for Ebola, Texas health officials said today.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, admitting it didn’t act fast enough in Dallas, now says it will send a newly created response team within hours to any U.S. hospital confirming a case of Ebola.Outside the U.S., the World Health Organization reports that new cases could reach 10,000 a week by December — 10 times the current rate.• Scenes of brutality.A TV station’s video clip shows police officers in Hong Kong today apparently beating a handcuffed pro-democracy protester during an operation to clear the streets.Other scuffles broke out with the authorities, and dozens were arrested in the worst violence since the rallies began more than three weeks ago.• North and South talk.Senior military officials from the two Koreas are holding talks today for the first time in seven years, the South Korean news agency says.• Campaign trip canceled.President Obama abruptly canceled visits to Union, N.J., and Bridgeport, Conn., today to convene a high-level meeting about the Ebola outbreak.On Tuesday, White House officials said that there would be no replacement nominated for Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. until after next month’s midterm elections.• Victims of chemical weapons.A New York Times report shows that the Pentagon kept silent as American and American-trained Iraqi troops repeatedly encountered, and on at least six occasions were wounded by, chemical arms left over from Iraq’s war with Iran in the 1980s.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks are sharply lower. European indexes closed down more than 2 percent, and Asian shares ended mostly higher.• Bank of America, American Express, eBay and Netflix are among those reporting earnings today.• The drug maker AbbVie said it will reconsider its advice to shareholders to vote in favor of the $54 billion takeover of the London-listed Shire.The move signals second thoughts about so-called tax inversions. The AbbVie deal would let the company reincorporate in Britain to take advantage of a lower tax rate.• The Treasury Department said today the U.S. budget deficit shrank to $483.4 billion in fiscal year 2014, from $680 billion a year ago.NOTEWORTHY• Ratings in the produce aisle.Whole Foods starts ranking fruits, vegetables and flowers today as “good,” “better” or “best,” based on the supplier’s sustainable farming practices, like pesticide and water use, the treatment of workers and waste management.• Royals are ready for a crown.Kansas City took a 3-0 lead over the Baltimore Orioles in the A.L. Championship Series with its 2-1 victory on Tuesday night. It’s a deficit from which only one baseball team has come back (the Red Sox, in 2004). Game 4 is today (4 p.m. Eastern, TBS).And the San Francisco Giants edged the St. Louis Cardinals, 5-4 in 10 innings, to take a 2-1 lead in the N.L. Championship Series. Game 4 is tonight (8 o’clock Eastern, FS1).• Add to your reading list.The finalists for the National Book Awards to American writers were announced today.They come after the Man Booker Prize was awarded Tuesday in Britain to the Australian author Richard Flanagan for “The Narrow Road to the Deep North,” which judges hailed as a “magnificent novel of love and war.”• Game postponed by drone.A soccer match between the national teams of Serbia and Albania was abandoned Tuesday night after rioting was set off by a small drone flying low over the stadium and trailing an Albanian nationalist banner.• Their wealth keeps growing.Forbes today publishes its highest-earning dead celebrities list, based on the earnings of their estates.Michael Jackson was No. 1 on last year’s list. His $160 million also happened to be far more than any living star.BACK STORYSecretary of State John Kerry and other top diplomats are in Vienna today, hoping to end a decade-long dispute over Iran’s nuclear program before their Nov. 24 deadline to reach a permanent accord.It was the U.S. that helped establish a nuclear Iran in the 1960s as part of President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s Atoms for Peace program, which required nuclear-armed nations to sell nuclear power technology to other countries in exchange for following certain nonproliferation rules.The first nuclear reactor in Iran was built during that period by Americans after a competition with Europeans.After the 1979 Islamic Revolution, the West withdrew from these agreements and contracts, and opposed Iran having civilian nuclear energy.The country moved to complete the projects itself, so it could generate its own supply of reactor fuel. By 2002, it had learned the process.The International Atomic Energy Agency, an arm of the U.N., adopted a resolution the next year seeking full transparency so it could verify the Iranian program’s peaceful purposes.Discord has continued since, though a long-term solution is now closer at hand than ever before.Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Email us at briefing@nytimes.com.