Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Countdown to shutdown.Congress resumes today with a Dec. 11 deadline for funding the government.John A. Boehner, speaker of the House, will be trying to persuade fellow Republicans, many of whom are furious about President Obama’s executive action on immigration, not to shut down the government again.• Ferguson meetings at the White House.President Obama hosts a series of meetings today on the violence in Ferguson, Mo.He discusses with his cabinet programs that provide military-grade weapons to state and local law enforcement agencies and meets with young civil rights leaders, elected officials and religious leaders.The white officer in the fatal shooting of the unarmed black teenager resigned from the police department in Ferguson.• Setback for Hong Kong protesters.The police arrested 40 pro-democracy protesters in Hong Kong early today and pushed back hundreds more using pepper spray and batons, a response to the group’s attempts to surround government headquarters.• The Supreme Court tackles social media.The justices hear arguments today on whether proof of intent is needed to convict someone of making threats — in this case, on Facebook.Elonis v. United States focuses on death threats that Anthony Elonis made to his ex-wife and co-workers and represents one of the first times the court will rule on freedom of speech in social media forums.• New climate talks.The U.N. Climate Change Conference begins today in Lima, Peru, another effort to reach global consensus on cutting emissions of greenhouse gases.Delegates hold a new optimism after President Obama and President Xi Jinping of China broke their stalemate over emissions two weeks ago.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks start the week lower. European shares ended off modestly, and Asian indexes mostly fell.• Retail sales over the four-day Thanksgiving weekend bombed, declining 11 percent from last year.With no clear explanation, the National Retail Federation said fewer people spent less money both at stores and online. The trade group stuck to its forecast of 4.1 percent growth for the whole holiday season.• Oil opened today at under $65 a barrel, the lowest in five years, after OPEC decided not to cut production last week. But the price then climbed about 3 percent.• Vox Media, the online publisher of The Verge, SBNation and Eater, closed a round of financing from a New York investment firm that values the company at around $380 million.• Pilots are preparing a Tuesday strike at Lufthansa Airlines, their ninth since April.OVER THE WEEKEND• An Egyptian court dropped all remaining criminal charges against former President Hosni Mubarak, including murder accusations in the killing of protesters demanding an end to his 30-year rule.• An arbitrator overturned the National Football League’s indefinite suspension of Ray Rice, the former Baltimore Ravens running back who knocked out his fiancée in an elevator altercation. The decision called the penalty imposed by the league’s commissioner “arbitrary.”• Nearly three-quarters of Swiss voters rejected a proposal to reduce annual immigration to 0.2 percent of the population, preliminary results showed.They also rejected a proposal to end tax breaks for wealthy foreigners.• Nicolas Sarkozy, the former president of France, was elected as the leader of his center-right party in a victory that could help his bid to become president again.• Former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York was hospitalized for treatment of a heart problem.• The third “Hunger Games” movie remained at No. 1 in movie ticket sales, with $56.9 million over the weekend, dwarfing No. 2 “Penguins of Madagascar” with $25.8 million.NOTEWORTHY• Scout cookies go digital.Girl Scouts will be able to sell their cookies online for the first time in January after the national leadership approved a web platform for them.More than 80 percent of the two million Girl Scouts sell cookies for about $4 a box in their annual fund-raiser.• Babies and blankets.Nearly 55 percent of infants nationwide are put to bed with soft blankets or covered by a comforter, even though such bedding raises the chances of suffocation or sudden infant death syndrome, federal researchers said today.• Mass weddings in Rio.In an annual event, nearly 2,000 low-income couples who couldn’t afford a ceremony married at a soccer stadium in Rio de Janeiro.• An AIDS tipping point.The number of people newly infected with H.I.V. over the last year was lower than the number of H.I.V.-positive people to receive treatment, an advocacy group said in a report marking World AIDS Day.• Leaders of the pack.The Green Bay Packers managed to hold off the New England Patriots in a 26-21 nail-biter. Both teams lead their divisions and are considered prime contenders for the Super Bowl.Tonight, the Jets take on the visiting Miami Dolphins (8:30 Eastern, ESPN).Here’s a roundup of N.F.L. games.BACK STORYDoes Islam prohibit music?Yusuf Islam, the former Cat Stevens, gave up gold records and pop stardom in the late 1970s after converting to Islam.Today, he begins his first North American concert tour in 35 years with a show in Toronto.Some Muslims believe that the Quran and religious tradition forbid singing, or at least the use of musical instruments, along with alcohol and tobacco.Others endorse only nasheeds, or a cappella religious songs.But many others embrace music. Some Sufi Muslims specialize in qawwali, a kind of devotional music that has gained mainstream acceptance.Some modern Muslim scholars say prohibitions of music are based on misinterpretations of the prophet.In his recent book, “Why I Still Carry a Guitar,” Yusuf Islam concludes: “There was not enough undisputed evidence in Islam’s original scriptural sources of divine knowledge to support the complete banning of music from human life.”Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.Want to get the briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.