HONG KONG —  Three founders of a Hong Kong protest movement surrendered to the police on Wednesday, in a gesture meant to press the government to face up to demands for free elections and to coax demonstrators into abandoning street camps that have become increasingly exhausted and divided.The protest movement that has gripped Hong Kong for more than two months has been carried along by theatrical acts and vivid images, and the protest leaders’ surrender to the police was more stagecraft. Their stay in the police station was brief, and they were not arrested.“I hope an end to this movement could advance Hong Kong’s democracy,” Benny Tai, one of the three founders of the group, Occupy Central With Love and Peace, told reporters after coming out of the station.“I am at peace, and I am hopeful,” he said.Mr. Tai and the two other founders of Occupy Central, Chan Kin-man and Chu Yiu-ming, arrived at the main police station swarmed by supporters and reporters while dozens of police officers managed the scene. Joseph Zen, a retired Roman Catholic cardinal of Hong Kong who has supported pro-democracy campaigns, also turned himself in. Minutes later, Shiu Ka-chun, a university lecturer who has supported the protests, also walked into the station.“We’re giving ourselves up to the police, but we’re not giving up,” Mr. Shiu said. “I believe what we do today is just and could bring about changes in society.”The surrender was laden more with symbolism than with immediate legal consequences. Arrest warrants have not been issued for the leaders, and the four men spent barely an hour in the police station before re-emerging to speak to reporters.In the police station, officers handed out special forms listing possible offenses related to the protests, such as unauthorized assembly and obstruction of the police, which the men were asked to fill out, Mr. Tai said.He said he had recommended that protesters who wished to surrender admit only to possible unauthorized assembly. After he spoke, dozens of other people also lined up outside the station to turn themselves in. By 7 p.m., 65 people had surrendered at the station, the police said.The Occupy Central leaders who turned themselves in on Wednesday have seemingly had little influence over the street occupations that have continued for more than two months.But Occupy Central was the campaign that initially promoted the idea of civil disobedience occupations on the streets of Hong Kong, and the three founders, especially Mr. Tai, remain influential voices in the city’s pro-democracy movement. Mr. Tai endorsed a student sit-in at the city government offices in late September that erupted into street occupations after the police used tear gas and pepper spray in a failed attempt to break up the protesters.At a news conference on Tuesday, however, the Occupy Central founders said the time had come to end the protest camps.Mr. Tai began Occupy Central in 2013, based on the idea that if the Hong Kong government ignored public demands for a democratic electoral system, residents would hold peaceful protests in Central, the city’s main financial district. But the student-inspired protests and the ensuing street occupations were not instigated or controlled by Occupy Central, and the scope of the occupations went far beyond what the group had proposed.Last week, the police demolished a protest camp in the crowded Mong Kok neighborhood, but demonstrators have returned to the area each night and clashed with the police. Protesters continue to occupy a main camp in the Admiralty district, next to the city government offices, and also a small part of Causeway Bay, a shopping area.Public opinion polls indicate that growing numbers of Hong Kong residents believe the street occupations have gone on too long, a sentiment that seemed likely to have deepened after student protesters instigated a failed siege of the government headquarters Sunday. That led to a night of seesaw struggles, ending with the police pushing back the crowds and then reducing the area controlled by the protesters.But student leaders have said that they will not leave the protest camps, and that even if they do, more ardent demonstrators are likely to step in.Instead, Joshua Wong, the best known of the youth leaders, started a hunger strike at the Admiralty protest camp on Monday, hoping to press the government to negotiate over plans for electoral changes. The protesters say that the plans approved by the Chinese government in August would give Hong Kong voters only a token say in electing the city’s leader, or chief executive.“We simply want to get back to the negotiation table,” Mr. Wong said at a news conference with two other student hunger strikers.In the evening, he said that he and the two others had consumed only water since Monday night, but that if their health worsened, they would follow medical advice to drink glucose water or even end their fast.For his part, Leung Chun-ying, the current chief executive, was adamant that he would not negotiate with the students over their demands for drastic changes to the proposed election rules.“The demands in question are not in keeping with legal procedures, and nor are they realistic,” Mr. Leung said in an emailed statement. “The government will not and cannot agree.”