HONG KONG —  Joshua Wong, the 18-year-old who has become the face of Hong Kong’s pro-democracy student protest movement, ended a hunger strike on Saturday, saying his doctor had advised him to do so as his health deteriorated.Later, another hunger striker withdrew, leaving two students still engaged in the strike. Efforts by the protesters to press the Hong Kong government into talks over the election process for the city’s leader have become increasingly troubled in recent days, and public support for their actions has been waning.Mr. Wong, a prominent leader of the protests that began here more than two months ago, started the hunger strike on Monday in an attempt to pressure the local government into negotiations. A prominent pro-democracy group declared on Tuesday that it was time to end the demonstrations in two parts of the city, and student leaders have said that they are considering whether to abandon the protest camps.“I feel extremely unwell. I feel dizzy and my limbs are weak,” Mr. Wong said Saturday in a statement. “Although I have ended the hunger strike, it doesn’t mean that the government can ignore our requests.”Another student who had joined Mr. Wong in the hunger strike ended her fast Friday night. Prince Wong Ji-yuet, a 17-year-old student, ended her hunger strike and was taken to a hospital for a checkup, according to Scholarism, the student protest group that the hunger strikers all support. Mr. Wong and Ms. Wong are not related.The street occupations have faced increasing police pressure and internal divisions.Hong Kong’s government, led by Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying, has been unwilling to offer concessions on the protesters’ demands that the city reject China’s plan for the elections, which would effectively allow Beijing to screen the candidates.At the main protest camp outside the government headquarters on Saturday afternoon, the numbers of protesters had dwindled amid chilly weather. On Thursday, protest leaders said they were discussing whether to call for a retreat.Mr. Wong, who was not at the news conference where members of Scholarism announced his withdrawal, had been on the hunger strike for 108 hours.