Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Prosecutions over torture?The C.I.A.'s use of torture and the U.S. reluctance to punish those responsible have set back efforts to fight torture worldwide, the U.N. special rapporteur on torture said today.The report detailing excessive tactics has put President Obama, who ended the program, on the defensive, with some Democrats accusing him of a cover-up.• Detention ends in Afghanistan.The Defense Department said today that it shut its last detention site in Afghanistan, a move that officials said was not related to the torture report.Separately, President Obama is ramping up efforts to transfer detainees out of the Guantánamo Bay prison. Sixty-eight prisoners were cleared for transfer, and five are scheduled to be moved by Dec. 31.• Clinching a budget deal.Congressional leaders are confident they can meet today’s deadline to pass a government budget and avoid a shutdown, despite dysfunction along the way.Representatives have balked at some of the bill’s provisions, including fewer regulations for Wall Street and a higher ceiling for donations to national nominating conventions.• Leaving bankruptcy behind.Detroit is officially no longer bankrupt, bringing to a close the largest municipal bankruptcy in American history after 17 months.Its reorganization plan allows the city to shed $7 billion of its debts and spend about $1.7 billion to remake city services over the next 10 years.• A peaceful dissolution.The police dismantled the last pro-democracy protest camp in Hong Kong today, facing little resistance but arresting more than 200 who stayed behind.The demonstrations have challenged the government for more than 10 weeks.• Kerry in Peru.Secretary of State John Kerry addresses the U.N. climate change conference and meets with the Peruvian president in Lima today.A draft agreement is circulating that does not bind nations to a single, global benchmark for emissions reductions. The conference ends Friday.• Rain in California.Moderate rain and gusty winds, the start of a serious storm, are bearing down on Northern California, which has closed many schools in anticipation.Eight inches of rain could fall on coastal mountains over a 24-hour period, the National Weather Service said.• At the White House.President Obama meets with the President’s Export Council today.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks are strongly higher after a rout driven by falling oil prices on Wednesday.European stocks closed mixed, but Asian indexes were sharply lower.• Google said today it will shut Google News in Spain rather than pay publishers for content that appears on the site under a law that takes effect in January.Similar legislation is underway in Germany and other European countries.• LendingClub, an online loan marketplace, soared in its public stock debut, rising 65 percent from its $15-a-share opening.• Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew and the S.E.C. chairwoman, Mary Jo White, as well as the C.E.O.s of Goldman Sachs and General Motors, address the New York Times DealBook conference in New York today.NOTEWORTHY• Fewer new Americans.The fertility rate in the U.S. fell for the sixth straight year in 2013, shrinking by almost 1 percent in part because of the slow economy.Some analysts worry that a shrinking birthrate will have negative implications for business growth down the road.• Too much radiation?A new report says two-thirds of women who have lumpectomies for breast cancer are receiving excessive radiation therapy.Studies show that three to four weeks of intensive radiation therapy is as effective as the traditional five- to seven-week treatment plan. It’s also cheaper and preferred by most women.But doctors say entrenched practices are difficult to change.• And the candidates are ...Nominees for the Golden Globes were announced today, with “Birdman,” “Boyhood” and “Fargo” leading the way.Tina Fey and Amy Poehler will host the Hollywood Foreign Press’s film-TV awards ceremony on Jan. 11.• Tech tips.It’s official: Instagram is bigger than Twitter, with over 300 million monthly active users compared with Twitter’s 284 million.And our columnists review the best weather and calendar apps, among the most-used kinds of smartphone tools.• Queen of pop.Holiday music by Pentatonix, “That’s Christmas to Me,” rose to No. 2 on the Billboard album chart this week, but it could not knock Taylor Swift out of the top spot.Her record, “1989,” is now threatening the “Frozen” soundtrack to be the year’s best-selling album.BACK STORYThere’s no single explanation for why people kiss under the mistletoe around Christmas — or why they bring the poisonous, parasitic, hallucinogenic plant into their homes at all.It appears in Norse mythology: After Baldr, the son of the goddess Frigga, is killed with a mistletoe arrow, Frigga decrees that mistletoe will never again be used as a weapon and that she will place a kiss on anyone who passes under it.Today’s mistletoe rite could also be left over from early efforts at conversion that combined Christian holidays with pagan rituals.Because it bears fruit in winter, mistletoe was considered a symbol of fertility and virility. Supposedly, it was burned in pre-Christian Britain by white-cloaked druids who cut sprigs of the plant from oak trees to mark the solstice.Now it stands for romantic love and destiny — if you stand beneath the mistletoe with someone, you’re supposed to kiss. Given the symbolism, you’re also probably supposed to marry ... and multiply.Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.Want to get the briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.