NAIROBI, Kenya —  More than 20 people were killed in two attacks on Kenya’s coast on Saturday night — with residents saying that many of the victims had their hands bound and their throats slit — in the latest in a string of gruesome assaults with ethnic undercurrents.The violence has deeply unnerved this country at a time of increasing insecurity and rising political tensions. Nonetheless, Kenya’s leading opposition politician, Raila Odinga, vowed on Sunday to press ahead with a large demonstration in downtown Nairobi, the capital, on Monday.The Kenyan government fears that opposition supporters may try to occupy a public park, setting up what could be a bloody showdown with the police. Government officials said that such a sit-in would be illegal and that they would not allow the center of Nairobi to be turned into a Kenyan version of Tahrir Square, the plaza in Egypt’s capital, Cairo, that became the foremost symbol of the Arab Spring uprisings.Many Kenyans are worried about the Monday rally, given the heightened insecurity and strained mood. Some families have already begun to flee ethnically mixed areas in Nairobi and surrounding towns after leaflets mysteriously surfaced warning members of certain ethnic groups to leave.In Kenya, it is hard to draw a line between politics and ethnicity. Most people back politicians from their own ethnic group, and political tensions often stir up ethnic ones. Many analysts say that Kenya has not been this ethnically polarized since a disastrous election in 2007 set off riots and clashes that killed more than 1,000 people.“Government, opposition must step back from the brink,” read the lead editorial in the Sunday Nation, one of Kenya’s biggest newspapers.Over the past few weeks, Kenya’s opposition leaders have held a number of boisterous rallies across the country, all of them peaceful. But the government is taking no chances about Monday’s event, timed to commemorate the anniversary of Kenya’s multiparty democracy movement that began in 1990. Thousands of police officers will be deployed throughout Nairobi with orders to keep roads open and trade flowing. Even so, many businesses have advised employees and customers to stay away from downtown, fearing that riots could break out.At the same time, Kenya’s security forces seem overwhelmed by the spate of killings along the coast that the government has called politically motivated.According to the police inspector general, two villages, Hindi and Gamba, were attacked around the same time at about 11 p.m. Saturday, with dozens of armed intruders killing civilians, blasting their way into a jail and burning down houses and a church. Residents said that, as with other recent attacks, most of the victims were Kikuyus — the same ethnic group as Kenya’s president, Uhuru Kenyatta — and that many had been slaughtered with knives, their hands tied behind their backs.Police officers said they found a blackboard placed in a road near the killings that said “Raila Tosha,” which means “Raila’s enough,” and “Kick Christians out of coast,” suggesting a domestic source for the violence rather than a foreign one. Those implications, whether true or not, are bound to push the political temperature even higher.Many Kenyans and security experts alike are confused about who is behind the attacks, which began last month with a full-fledged raid on what had been a sleepy coastal town.At first, many believed the culprits were Shabab militants from Somalia, who have taken responsibility for the killings, including the attacks on Saturday night. In a radio address, the Shabab boasted that the same group of militants had attacked both villages and “disabled the enemy of God.” The Shabab promise to keep wreaking havoc in Kenya as long as the country has troops in Somalia. (Kenya sent troops into Somalia in 2011 in an effort to stabilize the country.)But now it is not so clear who the killers are. The coastal areas hit recently are a hive of local grievances over land, ethnicity and economic opportunity. The Kenyan government is in the midst of building a huge, multibillion-dollar port in the same area, and many business interests are now jostling for a piece of the pie.Last month, President Kenyatta attributed the attacks to “local political networks,” and the governor of the surrounding county was promptly arrested on suspicion of murder. Many people who know the governor insist that he is innocent. Some analysts, though, have speculated about whether local groups disgruntled with Mr. Kenyatta’s government might be cooperating with the Shabab to mount attacks against Kikuyus.The most obvious victim is Kenya’s tourism industry, a pillar of the economy. Western governments, including the United States and Britain, have issued travel advisories, scaring away tourists. The Kenyan coast is usually packed in the summer with kite surfers, fishermen and sunburned European children digging holes in the sand. But now countless hotels have closed or nearly shut down, laying off legions of cooks, maids, waiters, drivers and many others who support their families with tourism jobs.“It’s so terribly, depressingly empty,” a hotel manager said Sunday night. “It’s made me rethink all my plans. You just don’t know now. It may be time to buy some land in Europe.”Street crime also seems to be getting worse. On Sunday, just hours after the raids on the villages, a Western tourist was killed in a botched robbery while she was visiting an old fort in Mombasa.Kenyan news media reported that the tourist was Russian, and that armed men shot her and stole her camera.