An unlikely alliance of liberal intellectuals, big donors and Republican strategists has hit on a solution to the influence of big money in politics: even more money.Starting Monday, the recently formed Mayday “super PAC” began a $12 million advertising campaign to help elect lawmakers of both parties who support proposals to diminish the influence of big donors. The PAC is the most ambitious effort yet to turn dismay over supersize contributions into a winning political issue.“Inside-the-Beltway people don’t think this issue matters, they don’t think voters vote on the basis of this issue, and they advise their politicians not to talk about it,” said Lawrence Lessig, a professor at Harvard Law School with ties to Silicon Valley who is a founder of the Mayday PAC with Mark McKinnon, a former adviser to President George W. Bush. “We think this issue does matter, and we want to prove it.”As for the contrast between the group’s message and financing, Mr. Lessig has adopted a slogan: “Embrace the irony.”A major part of the effort, which will first take shape in Iowa and New Hampshire, is to fight money with money. The Mayday PAC will begin buying up to a total of $4 million in advertising for both states, where voters are historically receptive to the anti-big-money message, advertising is relatively cheap and any victories are likely to be noticed by both parties’ future presidential aspirants.In New Hampshire, the group will seek to help Jim Rubens, a former Republican state senator, defeat Scott P. Brown, a former United States senator from Massachusetts, in the Republican primary for United States Senate. In Iowa, the group is backing Staci Appel, a Democrat, for an open congressional seat. Officials said the PAC is expected announce its next three targets in August.The ultimate goal is to reverse a series of defeats that advocates of tighter restrictions on campaign money have suffered since the Supreme Court’s 2010 Citizens United decision. That decision freed corporations and unions to engage in unlimited independent political spending on behalf of candidates. In the past four years, court rulings and regulatory decisions have only expanded the influence and reach of big donors at the federal and state level.Many Democratic lawmakers and reform groups have pushed to repeal the decision through a constitutional amendment — the Senate will vote on such a measure this year — or with legislation that would impose more restrictions on fund-raising. But those efforts have little support among Republicans and face an uphill climb in Congress.Mayday and allied groups — including a new organization called Every Voice, which will focus this fall on statehouse races, and the Fund for the Republic, which is raising millions to finance grass-roots organizing and legal research — are taking a different tack. Instead of pushing for new restrictions on contributions, they are advocating proposals to spur more giving by small donors, in the hope of diluting the influence of big ones.The Mayday PAC’s own funding is a mix of large and small: Silicon Valley luminaries like Reid Hoffman, a co-founder of LinkedIn, and Peter Thiel, a libertarian billionaire, have made big contributions to match Mr. Lessig’s small-donor fund-raising.In Congress, the allies are urging lawmakers to support legislation like the Government by the People Act, sponsored by Representative John Sarbanes, Democrat of Maryland, and the Citizen Involvement in Campaigns Act, sponsored by Representative Tom Petri, a Wisconsin Republican. Both measures offer tax credits or vouchers to people who make small donations. To win Mayday’s support — or fend off the group’s planned attack ads — candidates need only endorse one of these measures.The limited requirements for the super PAC’s support are intended, in part, to help Mayday enlist more Republicans. Party leaders like Senator Mitch McConnell and conservative legal scholars are deeply opposed to proposals that would diminish money in campaigns, arguing that they are an infringement on free speech and healthy political competition. Mr. Rubens, for example, is in favor of giving voting-age citizens a $50 tax rebate check every two years to be spent on candidate contributions.“As long as campaign finance is seen as a liberals-only issue, I don’t think we’ll be able to bring in the resources that we need to win,” said Nick Penniman, the executive director of Fund for the Republic, which has received money from members of the Democracy Alliance, a club of top liberal donors. “If you’re a Republican or an independent in this country and you think that money plays too much of a role in politics, you really have no home.”Mayday’s founders believe that rank-and-file Republicans are more open to limiting the impact of big contributions than their leaders are. Mr. McKinnon worked with Juleanna Glover, a Republican lobbyist and former George W. Bush aide, and Trevor Potter, a Republican lawyer who founded the Campaign Legal Center, to interview 60 Republican and conservative leaders, strategists and activists for their views on money and politics.They found that Mr. Obama’s ability to outraise Republican presidential candidates in two straight elections had cut against a common belief in Republican circles that unlimited campaign fund-raising and spending gave their party an advantage. At the same time, some of the respondents told them that Republicans’ support for unrestrained campaign money was cementing public suspicion that the party catered to the wealthy.“Now marry that with the idea that conservatives are realizing that we don’t really have a free public policy market, and the reason for that is directly tied to money,” Mr. McKinnon said in an interview. “The whole idea of crony capitalism is getting a lot of equity in the party right now.”Indeed, crony capitalism has been a major theme of Tea Party attacks on Mr. Obama and in primary battles that have unseated Republicans like Eric Cantor, the departing House majority leader.There were no Cantor-like defeats in 2012, when a super PAC called Friends of Democracy, supported by Jonathan Soros, a wealthy donor and activist, invested $2.8 million to back nine candidates around the country deemed supportive of new campaign finance rules. While eight of them won, the victories did not make a major splash, in part because of the sheer volume of money spent by other outside groups and the public’s focus on the 2012 presidential race.Friends of Democracy will announce this week that it is merging with Public Action Campaign Fund into Every Voice. David Donnelly, the new group’s executive director, said it would work closely with Mr. Lessig’s organization, but with more of an emphasis on state elections. In an interview, Mr. Donnelly said the group would seek to pass small-donor and public financing programs in state capitals.“Our strategy in 2012 was to find fifteen or twenty thousand late-deciding voters and persuading them, so that we could prove that a close deciding election could go to the reformer,” Mr. Donnelly said. “What Mayday wants is to elevate the issue over all as one of the most important issues in the election.”