The concept of debating has been debated. Parade etiquette has been discussed. One candidate trained himself not to speak his challenger’s name.When polls opened on Tuesday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo finally reached the finish line of a primary campaign he did not want in the first place — and generally declined to acknowledge. His top challenger, Zephyr Teachout, a law professor, reveled in her uphill battle.Unlike some primaries, the looming question today is not so much who will win (though there is some suspense in the lieutenant governor’s race), but what the outcome will say about Mr. Cuomo and how liberal Democrats assess his first term in office.As voters head to the polls, here is a primary primer.ZEPHYR WHO? Ms. Teachout, a professor at Fordham Law School who has studied corruption, was recruited by the Working Families Party, a group of unions and liberal activists, when it was considering whether to withhold its support from the governor. The party and the governor ended up making amends, but Ms. Teachout decided to challenge him anyway.THE INCUMBENT Mr. Cuomo’s political team has not enjoyed the past few weeks. They are frustrated that Mr. Cuomo faces a spirited primary challenge, because he is an incumbent who is generally popular with voters, and they are even more frustrated with the amount of media attention that Ms. Teachout has received.THE CHALLENGER Ms. Teachout has focused on a range of policy issues that have been the subject of grumbling among liberal activists for several years. She says the governor caters to his wealthy campaign donors, his economic policies have hurt regular New Yorkers, and he has failed to clean up corruption in Albany. (A third Democrat, Randy Credico, a political comedian and activist, is also on the ballot.)ODDS Ms. Teachout is just about the only person who has predicted that Ms. Teachout will win on Tuesday. While there has been no public polling of her matchup with Mr. Cuomo, her most obvious challenge is name recognition: A statewide poll conducted from Aug. 14 to 17 by Quinnipiac University found that 85 percent of Democratic voters had not heard enough about her to form an opinion.MONEY The fund-raising difference between the two candidates is staggering: As of late August, Mr. Cuomo had $30.6 million in his campaign account, compared with $324,000 for Ms. Teachout. Mr. Cuomo’s largest expense this year was a $1.1 million payment for television advertising, which was just one of many such payments; Ms. Teachout’s biggest bill was $35,550 to a political consulting firm as part of her effort to gather enough petition signatures to qualify for the primary ballot.LIABILITIES Ms. Teachout has frequently criticized Mr. Cuomo for his handling of the Moreland Commission, an ethics panel that he created and then abruptly shut down. The governor’s dealings with the panel are now being investigated by federal prosecutors. (At one point while Mr. Cuomo was speaking on Monday at a rally near Times Square, someone in the crowd heckled him by shouting, “Moreland Commission!”) Mr. Cuomo has highlighted Ms. Teachout’s lack of political experience, saying she would be unfit to run the state; she has also been criticized for not expressing sufficient support for Israel.RUNNING MATES Few New Yorkers could probably name the current lieutenant governor, Robert J. Duffy, a former Rochester mayor. He is not seeking re-election. But the race for his office has injected a measure of uncertainty into the primary election: Mr. Cuomo’s new running mate is Kathy Hochul, a former congresswoman from Buffalo, who is not well known outside of Western New York. Ms. Teachout’s running mate is Tim Wu, a professor at Columbia Law School, who is also not well known to Democratic voters in the state but has an avid following in tech circles: He is credited with popularizing the term “net neutrality.” As a result, Mr. Cuomo’s efforts have largely been focused on ensuring that Ms. Hochul prevails in her race.GAFFES Mr. Wu flunked a quiz about upstate New York. (He dismissed it as a “gotcha test about random questions.”) Mr. Cuomo said that debates could be "a disservice to democracy.” (He later asserted that he was joking and that reporters did not understand his joke.) His campaign manager also physically blocked Ms. Teachout from approaching the governor at a parade on Saturday, an inelegant moment that was caught on video.TURNOUT In 2010, when there was a hard-fought Democratic primary for state attorney general, 661,000 people voted – about 13 percent of registered Democrats. Jerry Skurnik, a political consultant, predicted a smaller turnout this year, probably 400,000 to 500,000 Democratic voters. “That’s pretty low,” he said.OTHER RACES There are a number of competitive legislative primaries, including two involving members of a breakaway faction of Democrats in the State Senate. Three incumbent senators are also running despite facing criminal charges for corruption. (There is no Republican primary for governor; the party’s candidate is Rob Astorino, the Westchester County executive.)PRIMARY DAY Ms. Teachout received applause after she cast a ballot for herself early Tuesday in the stuffy gymnasium of Public School 20 in Fort Greene, Brooklyn. Later, she planned to greet voters in several neighborhoods in Manhattan and Brooklyn. Mr. Cuomo and his girlfriend, the Food Network host Sandra Lee, voted later in the morning at a church near their home in New Castle, N.Y., in Westchester County. They were greeted by a small group of protesters opposed to hydrofracking. Mr. Cuomo had no other appearances planned.PARTIES Ms. Teachout and her supporters will gather at Hudson Terrace, an event space in Hell’s Kitchen. Mr. Cuomo, in keeping with his this-is-not-a-contest posture, did not schedule a party; after the polls close, he said, he expected to be at his office in Midtown Manhattan. Ms. Hochul planned to attend a victory party in Erie County.