WASHINGTON —  In an excellent scene from “Mitt,” the new documentary about the former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney’s two presidential campaigns, the filmmaker asks one of Mr. Romney’s sons, Josh, whether all the hassle and indignity of campaigning is worth it. Josh Romney hesitates, saying that he had been so “trained” to deliver scripted happy talk in media interviews, that this might be hard. “To actually speak my mind is very different,” he finally says.He goes on to offer his standard sound bite (“It’s been so great to get to know the country”) followed by a “translation” of what he actually thinks: (“This is so awful.”)In this spirit, we offer our best translation of what President Obama really meant Tuesday night as he delivered his State of the Union address — the annual set-piece that is perhaps the most scripted, revised, edited, vetted and scrubbed performance a president gives every year.After each line from the actual text of the speech, we have offered what we imagine was the presidential thought bubble behind it. A decoder ring, if you will.Actual text of speech: “America does not stand still — and neither will I. So wherever and whenever I can take steps without legislation to expand opportunity for more American families, that’s what I’m going to do.”Translation: “I want to emphasize to my Republican friends — actually, they’re not my friends, scratch that — that I just said the words ‘without legislation.’ Everyone get that?”Text: Today, after four years of economic growth, corporate profits and stock prices have rarely been higher, and those at the top have never done better. But average wages have barely budged. Inequality has deepened.Translation: “Have you noticed how ‘inequality’ is a thing these days? That whole de Blasio-Elizabeth Warren populist left deal? I can do that, too.”Text: For the first time in over a decade, business leaders around the world have declared that China is no longer the world’s No. 1 place to invest; America is.Translation: Yay, team.Text: “For several years now, this town has been consumed by a rancorous argument over the proper size of the federal government. It’s an important debate — one that dates back to our very founding. But when that debate prevents us from carrying out even the most basic functions of our democracy — when our differences shut down government or threaten the full faith and credit of the United States — then we are not doing right by the American people.”Translation: “When people hear ‘shut down,’ they think ‘Republicans, bad.’ Shut down, Republicans bad. Shut down, Republicans bad. Shut down, Republicans bad.”Text: “Last month, thanks to the work of Democrats and Republicans, this Congress finally produced a budget that undoes some of last year’s severe cuts to priorities like education.”Translation: “I know, I still can’t believe it either.”Text: “In America, our success should depend not on accident of birth, but the strength of our work ethic and the scope of our dreams. That’s ... how the son of a barkeeper is speaker of the House.”Translation: “Nice little bipartisan grace note there. I bet Boehner cries (turns to speaker during applause). C’mon, John, cry, you know you want to.”Text: “My administration has launched two hubs for high-tech manufacturing in Raleigh and Youngstown.”Translation: “Raleigh. North Carolina. Kay Hagan. Tough Senate race. Go Kay!Text: “The debate is settled. Climate change is a fact.”Translation: “Ooh, they’ll be going nuts over that one on Fox tomorrow. I might even have to watch some of that.”Text: “So tonight, I’ve asked Vice President Biden to lead an across-the-board reform of America’s training programs to make sure they have one mission: train Americans with the skills employers need, and match them to good jobs that need to be filled right now.”Translation: “I’m worried that Joe’s seemed a little bored lately.”Text: It’s time to do away with workplace policies that belong in a “Mad Men” episode.Translation: “Can’t prove it to you enough: I am hip to the pop culture.”Text: “I firmly believe when women succeed, America succeeds.”Translation: “And when women vote, Democrats succeed.”Text: “While the stock market has doubled over the last five years, that doesn’t help folks who don’t have 401(k)’s.”Translation: “Nor does it help my popularity on Wall Street, so why did I even mention this?”Text: “For decades, few things exposed hard-working families to economic hardship more than a broken health care system. And in case you haven’t heard, we’re in the process of fixing that.”Translation: “ ‘If you like that line, you can keep it.’ It’d be funny if I said that. Or maybe not.”