Over the course of one week in early October, Sanford A. Rubenstein appeared on the front page of The New York Post four days in a row. It was a lot — even for him.Mr. Rubenstein, a civil rights lawyer who has handled some of New York’s most explosive cases of police brutality over the years, has been featured so often on the city’s tabloid covers that some have joked he owns a time share there. But this run of publicity was different. The noisy headlines in 180-point type did not describe him as what he had been for decades: a man who fought the police on behalf of victims’ families. They described him as what he had become: a man accused of rape.On Oct. 1, Mr. Rubenstein, who is 70, showed up at the Four Seasons restaurant for the gala 60th-birthday party of a longtime friend and collaborator, the Rev. Al Sharpton. He spent the evening milling under balloons in a crowded ballroom with Spike Lee, Aretha Franklin and Mayor Bill de Blasio. When he went home, two women went with him. One spent the night: a 43-year-old board member of the National Action Network, Mr. Sharpton’s civil rights group. The next morning, her lawyer Kenneth J. Montgomery said, the woman woke feeling “foggy” and discovered Mr. Rubenstein sexually assaulting her. There were bruises on her arms, Mr. Montgomery said, and condoms on the floor; she later experienced vaginal bleeding.From the start, Mr. Rubenstein has forcefully denied the allegations, mainly through his own lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, who maintains that the encounter was consensual and that his client suffered in its wake. Within days of the complaint, and though no charges had been filed, photographs were published of investigators hauling evidence — including a mattress — from Mr. Rubenstein’s penthouse on East 72nd Street in Manhattan. Unflattering descriptions of his body and his sex life appeared in the news after a series of humiliating leaks.Perhaps most painfully, in a gesture widely read as damage control, Mr. Sharpton publicly cut ties with Mr. Rubenstein, saying that regardless of the facts, he felt “betrayed” that Mr. Rubenstein had even considered a tryst with a ranking member of his organization. Beyond the personal sting, the break had professional repercussions: Mr. Rubenstein started losing clients, among them the family of Eric Garner, whose case re-erupted this month when a Staten Island grand jury decided not to indict the police officer who applied the chokehold that killed him.All of which has left Mr. Rubenstein, who by his own admission has always tried cases in the court of public opinion, at grave risk of dying by the same media sword he has lived by now for almost 40 years. Not only has he descended into an unaccustomed funk, those who know him say, but he has also been sidelined, ironically, at a time when the central theme of his career, fighting police violence, has gained new traction.Just two weeks ago, Mr. Sharpton announced plans to march on Washington to protest the Garner case and the death of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo. There is little doubt that in the past, Mr. Rubenstein would have planned to attend the march, as he had attended actions on behalf of clients like Abner Louima, a Haitian immigrant tortured with a broomstick by officers in Brooklyn in 1997, and Nicole Paultre Bell, the fiancée of Sean Bell, a black man who was killed by the police outside his bachelor party in Queens in 2006.But instead of preparing for the protest, Mr. Rubenstein was more or less in hiding, his friends and colleagues said, seeing almost no one and anxiously awaiting the final disposition of his case.“He’s devastated,” said Jay Schwitzman, a lawyer who brought Mr. Rubenstein in to help him represent the family of Tamon Robinson, a black man fatally struck by a police car in Brooklyn in 2012. “He’s taken this extremely, exceptionally hard.”On the advice of Mr. Brafman, who recently said he had “every expectation” that the investigation would be closed “in the very near future” with no charges brought by the Manhattan district attorney’s office, Mr. Rubenstein declined to be interviewed. But he did answer a few select questions in writing.The complainant announced on Dec. 8 that she planned to sue him for civil damages. “She is managing expectations and trying to get her life back,” Mr. Montgomery, her lawyer, said. “Her faith in the system has been shocked.”So has Mr. Rubenstein’s, Mr. Schwitzman said, adding that even if he is exonerated, the harm is already irreparable. “No matter what happens now, the damage is over,” Mr. Schwitzman said. “It’s done.”There are any number of ways to describe Mr. Rubenstein’s place in the fractious tribe of the New York bar. He is, among other things, a Court Street lawyer, a term that situates him both in a physical location — his office is at 16 Court Street in Brooklyn — and in a stylistic genre. When people say “Court Street lawyer,” they generally mean a street-smart sharpie who may not have an Ivy League degree but does possess verve, hustle and a striver’s charisma.A chief way to display that charisma, particularly in Brooklyn, is to get a good suit, and Mr. Rubenstein is famed for his collection. He tends to favor the roomy double-breasted look with peaked lapels, pocket squares and vociferous ties. Especially when he was younger and his slicked-back hair was darker, it was a wardrobe that gave him the semblance of a world-wise law school student with a weekend job managing the door of a cut-rate nightclub in Brighton Beach.A key to Mr. Rubenstein’s success (beyond the clothes) is his appetite for — and mastery of — the media, a tool he has wielded with Barnumesque élan basically since passing the bar exam in 1972. Every court reporter in New York has a Sandy Rubenstein story: the time, say, that he spent 15 minutes positioning the participants in a news conference to achieve maximum exposure to the cameras for himself. Or the day he rode the negligible distance from his office to the courts in a limousine so large that he could almost have entered through the back door and reached his destination by exiting from the front.But the defining aspect of his career is that he is a white man who has built a thriving practice largely out of representing black men harmed or killed by the police. There are, of course, the cases everybody knows about: Mr. Louima; Mr. Bell; Ousmane Zongo, an unarmed African man fatally shot by the police during a raid on a Chelsea warehouse in 2003. Then there are those that fewer remember: Tamon Robinson, killed by a patrol car, for instance.In his 2010 memoir, “The Outrageous Rubenstein,” Mr. Rubenstein attributes his racial sensitivity to growing up in a multicultural community in the Ravenswood Houses in Astoria, Queens. His father, a Sears & Roebuck salesman, and his mother, a secretary, were natives of Brooklyn. When Mr. Rubenstein was in his teens, the family moved to Rockland County. He eventually attended Rockland Community College and the State University of New York at Oswego, becoming, as he writes, the first man in his family with a college degree.At 23, while teaching elementary school in Harlem, Mr. Rubenstein decided to pursue a legal career. He signed up for night classes at Brooklyn Law School and worked as a clerk for the storefront firm of Jacobs, Jacobs & Skolnick in Bedford-Stuyvesant. The firm’s founding partners, the Jacobs brothers, were retired policemen, said Scott Rynecki, Mr. Rubenstein’s own law partner of nearly 30 years, and their practice catered to the neighborhood’s growing population of Haitians.By the early 1980s, Jacobs, Jacobs had broken up and Mr. Rubenstein moved to 16 Court Street, where he established a personal injury firm with a specialty of sorts in Haitian clients. He wrangled work through a toll-free hotline (800-447-HURT), began collecting Haitian art and turned a friendship with Wilson Desir, the Haitian consul general in New York, into an advisory trip to Port-au-Prince to discuss bond issues and democracy with Haiti’s president at the time, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.It was in August 1997, after Mr. Rubenstein had served a stint in the Rockland County Legislature, that Mr. Louima showed up in the emergency room of Coney Island Hospital with a lacerated rectum and complaints that he had just been abused by officers at the 70th Precinct station house in Flatbush. Mr. Rubenstein knew the family; he had done legal work for Mr. Louima’s uncle, Bishop Philius H. Nicolas of the Evangelical Crusade of Fishers of Men in Brooklyn. Bishop Nicolas immediately hired Mr. Rubenstein to represent his nephew in what seemed at first to be another personal injury case.The Louima matter, which became a cause célèbre culminating in two criminal trials and a federal lawsuit that ended with an almost $9 million settlement, thrust Mr. Rubenstein into the spotlight — and into the orbit of Mr. Sharpton, at that point still a street tactician who had not yet evolved into his current slimmer, more polished persona.The bond between the men is complicated by their similarities as much as their differences — both are theatrical, self-regarding and cannily ambitious. Over the past two decades, they have worked together, marched together and socialized together. Mr. Rubenstein spoke for Mr. Sharpton when he was arrested in 2001 while protesting a Navy facility in Vieques, Puerto Rico. In 2006, when the musician James Brown, Mr. Sharpton’s surrogate father, died, Mr. Rubenstein walked with him in a funeral procession through Harlem.That is no doubt why Mr. Rubenstein has taken the rebuff by Mr. Sharpton as an affront, his lawyer said. In an interview last month, Mr. Sharpton aggressively played down their history, saying that in 17 years, they worked together on only a handful of cases, and that Mr. Rubenstein sometimes “got in front” of the cases by rushing from the courthouse to deliver statements to reporters. “I would tell him, ‘Look, this isn’t about you,’ ” Mr. Sharpton said.He also said that he and Mr. Rubenstein had never quite seen eye to eye in terms of ideology, but instead had maintained “a functional” relationship. “I got someone who could file legal papers,” he explained, “and Sandy got political-slash-civil-rights credibility. It was never a love affair. It was a ‘neither one of us has a date to the prom, so let’s go together’ kind of thing.”In a riposte to Mr. Sharpton, Mr. Rubenstein wrote in a statement: “Reverend Sharpton helped create public awareness about cases of police brutality, but it was I and the legal teams I was a part of who went to court and obtained for those victims millions of dollars in damages.”He further noted that when Mr. Sharpton wrote the foreword to his memoir a few years back, he referred to its author as someone who “believed in the basic fundamental pursuit of justice.”For all his current belittling of Mr. Rubenstein, Mr. Sharpton could not help expressing admiration, especially for his former ally’s facility with the media. He recalled how when he was detained in the Vieques case, he would get up early and simultaneously watch different news programs on the federal jail’s four television sets. One day, Mr. Rubenstein appeared in succession on all four screens, making the rounds of the morning shows, speaking on his behalf.“Later on, I called someone,” Mr. Sharpton said, “and asked, ‘Explain to me how a guy can do every major station in New York, each of them supposedly exclusive, and all of them before 8 in the morning.’ The only answer is, that’s Sandy.”By all rights, this should be Mr. Rubenstein’s moment. On Nov. 20, for instance, a 28-year-old black man, Akai Gurley, was killed by a police officer in a stairwell of the Louis H. Pink Houses in Brooklyn. Within days, the news media reported that the officer who shot him did not immediately call for help but instead texted his union representative.  If ever there was a Sandy Rubenstein case, this was one. But he was not taking cases. Mr. Gurley’s family enlisted Mr. Montgomery — the lawyer for Mr. Rubenstein’s accuser.From Brooklyn to Ferguson to Cleveland, where last month officers shot a 12-year-old black boy who was brandishing a toy gun, people are talking about race and the police. One profound development of the last few months is that more Americans, regardless of race, have started to see seemingly isolated cases of police violence as outbreaks of the same social illness. Pundits and protesters have called for systemic solutions; but that is not what Mr. Rubenstein does.What he does is win settlements: $3.25 million for Sean Bell’s fiancée, $3 million for Mr. Zongo’s family. The list goes on. Even as the debate has moved toward finding answers and underlying causes, Mr. Rubenstein, in his written answers to questions, said his main goal as a lawyer had always been to “obtain the maximum amount of damages” and to pursue reform “when possible.”That approach, which essentially applies personal-injury tactics to brutality cases, has earned him criticism from colleagues with a broader mind-set.“There are some attorneys who do actual, substantial civil rights work; then there are others who take profits,” said Richard Emery, the chairman of the Civilian Complaint Review Board and a lawyer whose lawsuits have forced New York to halt the practice of strip-searching inmates on Rikers Island. “I put Rubenstein in the latter group.”Mr. Emery and others acknowledged that financial compensation is a standard practice that does benefit individual families; nonetheless, they condemned Mr. Rubenstein as lacking vision, having an unseemly style and relying too heavily on money as a means of redress, especially when some of it goes to him.To Mr. Rynecki, Mr. Rubenstein’s law partner, all of this is sour grapes. “They’re jealous,” he said. “We’ve been involved in 90 percent of the highest-profile police brutality cases in the last 20 years. Clients wouldn’t come to us if we weren’t getting results. Besides, Sandy’s not the type of lawyer who just settles cases and says goodbye. He stays in touch.”The clients agree. Mr. Louima, for one, said that well after his case had been closed, he still called Mr. Rubenstein for comfort and advice — at moments, he noted, when the media was not around. And Mr. Schwitzman, the lawyer who worked on the Robinson case, said Mr. Rubenstein had once organized a march for Mr. Robinson without Mr. Sharpton, out of the spotlight and on his own time.“He was always there for me, whether the cameras were there or not,” Ms. Bell recalled. She told a story: When her fiancé was killed, he was carrying their wedding bands — it was, after all, his bachelor party. The police seized everything on him, the bands included, as evidence.“Then one day Sandy called,” she said. “He told me, ‘I have something you’re gonna want to see.’ He came over to the house. He’d gotten them back. He said, ‘I’d like to present you with your wedding ring.’ ”And maybe that is enough. Not every lawyer is Clarence Darrow or Thurgood Marshall; some just come from Court Street.