With his rich baritone hinting of the American West and craggy handsome looks, Bryan Cranston seems custom built to play outsize heartland characters. Where was he, you wonder, when Sam Shepard was writing “Buried Child” and “True West”? Even at his most relaxed, when he leans in and taps your knee to drive home a point, you don’t want to be caught spacing out.Mr. Cranston did star in Mr. Shepard’s “The God of Hell” in Los Angeles in 2006 — just before his career-defining transformation into Walter White, the chemistry teacher turned drug lord and high executioner he played for five seasons on the hit AMC series “Breaking Bad.” But apart from that, he’s done relatively little theater, and none at all in New York, which raises the stakes for his Broadway debut in “All The Way,” a three-hour production in which he’s onstage as Lyndon Baines Johnson almost every minute.Filled with arcane talk about “discharge petitions” and “procedural votes,” “All the Way” is not standard Broadway fare. But beyond Mr. Cranston’s star power, the producers are also counting on timing: The story of a ruthless president who got things done — without blinking at the costs and compromises — reminds us that partisan gridlock doesn’t have to be a permanent condition.“I think audiences are hungry for a play of this size and ambition,” said Robert Schenkkan, the playwright. “Everybody loves the four-character dining-room play about marriage. But there’s something about 20 bodies on the stage wrestling in this muscular visceral way with the political issues that still haunt us.”At its center is Mr. Cranston, 57, who grew up in a ranch house in the Canoga Park neighborhood of Los Angeles, not on a ranch in Texas Hill Country. For this performer, at least, background hardly matters.“Bryan has the two things you want in the actor who plays L.B.J.,” Mr. Schenkkan said. “He’s incredibly charismatic and charming and funny. And he’s also terrifying.” “All the Way,” which originated at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival with another actor in the lead and begins previews on Monday at the Neil Simon Theater, covers the first 12 months of Johnson’s presidency, beginning with the assassination of John F. Kennedy and ending with his own landslide victory in the next election.But what it’s really about is the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, the landmark bill that officially ended almost a century of Jim Crow. It is at once moral drama and historical pageant, with players that include the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Stokely Carmichael; the Senate giants Hubert Humphrey and Richard Russell; the F.B.I. despot J. Edgar Hoover and the Alabama segregationist George C. Wallace.It is almost insolently long for a Broadway show, though not as long as Mr. Schenkkan’s last play there, the six-hour “Kentucky Cycle,” which, despite winning the Pulitzer Prize, closed in 1993 after 33 regular performances.For all but 15 or 20 minutes, Mr. Cranston is enthroned in the Oval Office, prowling the stage in two-inch lifts to bring him closer to Johnson’s towering 6 foot 3, attached to a telephone that seems an extra limb — cajoling, wheedling, bullying, threatening, lying and bleating at the 19 other actors who play some 60 parts.Dubious conduct in a person, but useful in a political animal, even if Johnson would in the end defeat himself. “I wanted to play L.B.J.,” Mr. Cranston said, “because he is the King Lear of modern theater in this play.”Prosthetic nose, earlobes and chin help, but “I do the voice and his body movements,” Mr. Cranston said. To get the accent down, he listened to White House tapes and made research trips to the Lyndon Johnson Presidential Library in Austin, Tex., where he met, among others, Johnson’s younger daughter, Luci.What he can’t mimic is Johnson’s slovenliness, the sagging frame and feed-sack belly. “To keep the stamina and energy I need to do eight shows for five months, I need to be slimmer,” he said. “I need to have my body support me. I need my vocal strength.” That means, in the currently fashionable actor-as-athlete mode, a carb-free diet as well as a vow of silence on Mondays, when the theater is dark.In “Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream,” which is as much psychological portrait as biography, Doris Kearns Goodwin described Johnson’s political skills as “a surrogate for love and acceptance.” Mr. Cranston read it closely and discussed Johnson with her — his neediness, his insecurity, his fear of being alone. “He was a morass of self-loathing,” Mr. Cranston said.An authority he has yet to consult, though not for want of trying, is Robert Caro, the biographer who has spent nearly 40 years chronicling Johnson’s life. Mr. Cranston read “Master of the Senate,” the third volume in Mr. Caro’s monumental cycle, for clues to his legislative prowess.But Mr. Caro himself stayed aloof. “I asked to meet him, and he declined,” Mr. Cranston said. “I’d love to meet him. I just want to see what I could get from him. I’d just want to listen.”One can see why Mr. Caro would hesitate. To give away pieces of Johnson to an actor like Mr. Cranston is to run the risk that you won’t get them back. He belongs to the elite of “transformational” actors who do not so much master parts as merge into them by means of a kind of identity theft. (Praising Mr. Cranston’s “winning star turn” during the production’s tryout at the American Repertory Theater last fall in Cambridge, Mass., Charles Isherwood wrote in The New York Times that he “cuts a vigorous, imposing figure as L.B.J., employing a drawl as wide as the Rio Grande.”)The actor’s passionate embrace of the role grows out of his own political convictions. His memories of racial conflict date back to the Watts riots in 1965, an hour away from his home. “On television, you saw helicopters,” he recalled. “It was awful — the fire hoses and the dogs.” He added, “You cannot oppress a group of people for hundreds of years and think, ‘We’ll take it a little longer.’ “Yet his comparison of Johnson with King Lear suggests how much has changed since that presidency. In 1967, when still in office, Johnson was the butt of “MacBird!,” a mock-Shakespearean satire by Barbara Garson. Steeped in the ideology of campus protest, it presents a Macbeth-Johnson (played by a young Stacy Keach) who murders his predecessor in order to succeed him.But in 2014, the 50th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act and the War on Poverty, with anniversaries of two other Great Society triumphs, the Voting Rights Act and Medicare, a year away, Johnson endures as something far more interesting and even inspiring: the last and perhaps greatest of all legislative presidents, with his wizardly grip on the levers of governance at a time when it was still possible for deals to be brokered and favors swapped and for combatants to clash in an atmosphere of respect, if not smiling concord.Through a wealth of concrete names, dates and facts, “All The Way” depicts the complex means by which political change comes in a nation so large and diverse and so troubled as our own.But the true theme is deeper: the rootedness of the present in the past, the blurring of history and memory. The shifting battle lines drawn onstage — between blacks and whites, Northerners and Southerners, liberals and conservatives, Democrats and Republicans — feel at once distant and familiar.They are the tensions of the moment flung at us in more original and naked form. And the effect is magnified by the heightened self-consciousness of the political actors who, when not stating their cases, are seated onstage, witnesses to the history they are making.Put most simply, “All the Way” is a metaphor about democracy, each of us a political creature craving to be heard above the collective din. “The power makers deciding, and the disenfranchised watching it, until they demand their place,” Mr. Schenkkan said. “We embrace the chaotic aspect of democracy. It’s a fluid thing. Groups form and coalesce, drift apart.”Or as Mr. Cranston put it: “You’re in a political arena, and there’s a lot of people. The scope of it needs to feel presidential and big.”And crowded. The Neil Simon, which seats more than 1,400, is one of the larger houses on Broadway, but the stage is smaller than that of the American Repertory Theater. “We had to shrink the set quite substantially,” Bill Rauch, the play’s director, said in a telephone interview. As a result, he added, “it becomes more of a pressure cooker for the actors.”While he described the rehearsals as “grueling,” Mr. Cranston said that being in New York had actually been refreshing after the deluge of attention that came with the final season of “Breaking Bad.”“I put on my coat and my glasses and my hat, and I can walk right through Times Square, and nobody knows who I am, and I love that,” he said.While in New York, he’s had to do some last shots for “Godzilla,” a movie scheduled for release in May. He has also agreed to play the blacklisted screenwriter Dalton Trumbo in another film and is shopping a script of his own that he hopes to direct.And though Mr. Schenkkan has already written a follow-up to “All the Way,” called “The Great Society,” which follows Johnson through the crushing finish of his presidency, Mr. Cranston isn’t ready to think about continuing with the role. (It will be part of the Oregon Shakespeare Festival season this July.)That’s not to say there isn’t more for him to learn about the 36th president. Two days after our first conversation, Mr. Cranston rode the freight elevator to the subbasement where The New York Times stores its photographs, including an expansive Johnson archive: pictures from the Senate, the White House, the ranch in Texas.Paging through the folders, he stopped at a famous image of “the Johnson treatment” — the giant frame looming over a cowering victim. “And that’s friendly!” Mr. Cranston said. Then, holding up a studio portrait: “Main thing we have in common — we both have thin lips. The eyes, the wrinkles, the big ears.”Suddenly, they really did look alike — or rather, Mr. Cranston made himself resemble the photo: a subtle thrusting of the jaw, the forehead sliding back as if along a fitted groove, the voice slicked in a kind of Texas crude but coated with formality as he declaimed a line from Johnson’s announcement in 1968 that he would not run for a second term: “I shall not seek, and I will not accept.”Mr. Cranston chuckled. “I love it. He was legitimately larger than life.”