SELMA, Ala. —  Like many residents here this summer, Josh Wilkerson eagerly signed up to be an extra in the film “Selma.” But when he was asked to play a member of the sheriff’s posse that beat civil rights marchers on the Edmund Pettus Bridge, he respectfully declined.“I said, ‘This is my city, and that’s not in my heart,’ ” Mr. Wilkerson, 29, an office administrator, recalled recently. “I knew that would open doors that I’ve shut.”Today, in this small city still struggling to emerge from the shadows of Jim Crow, the attack on the bridge on March 7, 1965, is incessantly rued, revisited, and marketed as a tourist attraction. It was the dramatic apogee of the tense and violent period when the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and his followers took to the streets of Alabama to convince lawmakers of the need for a voting rights act. And it is the key moment in the film, which opens Thursday in a nation freshly embroiled in anguish about race and policing.And so, along with excitement and curiosity, the coming release of “Selma” has also stirred a host of complex, though familiar, emotions here, as the city’s 20,000 residents are again forced to consider the relationship between Southern history and the Southern present — and measure the distance between the two.For some, “Selma,” the film, will be a moment to celebrate how far the city — with its black mayor, majority-black City Council and black police chief — has come since the days of segregation. But others, particularly some white residents, are more wary.“There’s no reason to make a movie like that,” said Harvey King, 64, a Selma native and the owner of HK Custom Guns, a shop just outside of town. “It’s like if you cut your hand, and you keep messing with it. It’s not going to heal up.”Such reaction is unsurprising to George Patrick Evans, 70, Selma’s second black mayor. Many of the major players depicted in the film have died, including Jim Clark, who as sheriff led his posse to join state troopers in beating back marchers on the bridge in the confrontation known as Bloody Sunday. But other participants still walk Selma’s streets.“Those were difficult times,” Mr. Evans said. “Some of these families were a part of that difficult time. A lot of them are concerned now about what the movie is going to depict.”Long before the movie cameras arrived in Selma, the city’s past felt inescapable. The bridge over the muddy Alabama River is still the city’s most prominent landmark. On the north bank is Selma’s quaint downtown, which hosts a civil rights interpretive center operated by the National Park Service.On the south bank is the National Voting Rights Museum and Institute, founded by local activists who, since 1993, have hosted a yearly re-creation and commemoration of Bloody Sunday called the Bridge Crossing Jubilee.Like much of the rest of the South, Selma’s story since 1965 has encompassed change and stasis, accommodation and intransigence. Today, 80 percent of the population is African-American, and while blacks dominate local government, white residents retain much of the economic power. Selma High School, once all white, is today nearly all black; this year the local school district was taken over by the state because of poor management.Many white children attend private schools like John T. Morgan Academy, founded three months after Bloody Sunday. The United States senator after whom it was named was also a grand dragon of the Ku Klux Klan.But even Morgan has some black students now, and well-off black residents can be found living alongside white ones in the handsome, woodsy, suburban-style neighborhoods just beyond downtown.Residents noted other signs of progress: Black and white churches have been forming partnerships and intermingling. Mr. Wilkerson, who eventually took a job playing a National Guardsman in the film, noted that his twin brother, Paul, owner of a local institution called the Tally-Ho Restaurant, is swift to boot out customers who pepper their speech with racial slurs.If the slurs endure in some quarters, so, too, does a grinding destitution: In Dallas County, of which Selma is the county seat, 36 percent of residents live in poverty, nearly double the statewide rate. The city lacks a dedicated cinema, and as of Tuesday, had not decided where it would host a screening of “Selma.” (The film, d
irected by Ava DuVernay, has been talked about as an Oscar contender.)In the long term, many here are hoping that the film, along with the 50th anniversary of Bloody Sunday this March, will spur a boom in tourism.“We say it’s harvest time in Selma,” said Faya Rose Toure, a lawyer and activist and a founder of the both the Jubilee march and the voting museum. “We need a company to come in and say, ‘You know what? Considering what Selma did for democracy, I’m going to put my industry here.’”Ms. Toure, who is African-American, is intent on keeping the spirit of Bloody Sunday connected to the struggles of the present day. Last week, she walked onto the Edmund Pettus Bridge to draw attention to the fatal shootings nationwide of African-American men by the police — including one in Selma involving a 74-year-old black man whom officers accused of wielding a hatchet. No officers were charged with a crime.“This is the bridge where Bloody Sunday took place,” Ms. Toure said. “Because of that, we’ve got a black district attorney and black judges. But there’s a police culture built upon the premise that black life isn’t valuable.”Many here say Ms. Toure’s outspoken style is one reason that many whites do not participate in the yearly bridge crossing event. There is talk this year of a separate march of blacks and whites, organized by the churches.It remains to be seen if such efforts will lure white Selmians like Jamie Henderson, 65, across the bridge for the first time.“There’s a lot of people who recognize the importance of it, but don’t want to be an agitator,” he said.But would he go see the movie? “I doubt it,” he said. “If it comes on TV, maybe.”