HONG KONG — Chinese lending unexpectedly and drastically slowed in July to the lowest level since the depths of the global financial crisis, as a weak property market appeared to drive down demand for new loans, despite recent moves to ease credit.A broad measure of new credit was 273.1 billion renminbi, or $44.3 billion, in July, the central bank reported on its website Wednesday. That is the lowest monthly total since October 2008, the month before China announced a huge stimulus program that was seen as crucial to the country’s success in avoiding the deep recessions in the United States and Europe.The plunge in new credit puts more pressure on China’s economy, which is on track this year to grow at the slowest pace in a generation, since the slowdown after the 1989 crackdown on the student democracy movement in Tiananmen Square. Economists said the figures might prompt the government to accelerate its efforts to increase growth, including reducing the amount of funds that banks must set aside as reserves.“Today’s monetary data should not be viewed lightly,” Liu Li-Gang and Zhou Hao, economists with the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group, said in a note. “It means that the financial system is engaging a rapid deleveraging process, which could have significant repercussions on the real economy.”In an unusual step, the People’s Bank of China, the central bank, issued a separate statement that offered some explanations for the weakness of the July credit figures.It cited stricter supervision of the so-called shadow banking sector, the off-balance sheet lending by banks and trust companies. The sector’s explosive growth in recent years, much like the expansion of subprime lending in the United States a decade ago, has spurred talk of a looming banking crisis in China.The central bank also said that July was traditionally a slow month for lending. It noted that lending — when averaged with the strong growth in June, during which credit expanded by almost 2 trillion renminbi — was at a normal level.August may see a pickup in lending. In the early part of this month, the central bank said that new lending averaged 30 billion to 50 billion renminbi a day, a pace that, if maintained, would result in a big rebound. Credit would “maintain steady growth,” the bank said.Economists had forecast far higher levels of new credit, which China officially labels as “social financing” and includes all nongovernment borrowing from banks, bond markets, trusts and other sources. Standard Chartered Bank estimated new lending would be more than five times as high as the actual figure. Another measure, new local-currency loans, came in at 385.2 billion renminbi in July, about half of the projected amount and the lowest monthly total since December 2009, when the People’s Bank of China was slowing the huge surge in credit that was part of the stimulus.The weak lending figures came as the country’s economy gained some momentum in the second quarter, growing at 7.5 percent from the year-earlier period, a slight increase from the 7.4 percent growth in the first quarter. In June, the central bank lowered the amount of funds some regional banks had to keep as reserves, freeing them to lend more money. Still, those figures are far less than the double-digit gains routinely posted during the last three decades, and the lending figures released Wednesday point to further weakness.Mr. Liu and Mr. Zhou, the economists, said that the weak credit numbers made it “imminent” that the People’s Bank of China would lower the so-called required reserve ratio for banks to lift confidence.The figures may reflect continued softness in the country’s big residential property market, which drives demand for items as varied as cement and household appliances. Last year, economists at the British bank HSBC estimated the total value of housing stock in China to be 3.3 times annual gross domestic product, or more than $30 trillion. Prices for new homes declined in May and June, and home sales and residential construction fell in the first half of the year. Developers, who for years strove to avoid lowering prices, are increasingly doing so to clear unsold inventory caused by a property investment boom that resulted in empty apartment blocks in cities across China.The slowdown in lending fit with other Chinese economic figures released Wednesday that suggest the economy is losing steam.For example, fixed-asset investment, excluding rural households, rose 17 percent in the first seven months of the year, the slowest pace since 2001, according to figures from Bloomberg. Factory production slowed to a 9 percent gain in July from 9.2 percent in June, and retail sales growth was slightly below expectations.Wang Tao, an economist at UBS based in Hong Kong, said in a note that she did not see the lending slowdown as a sign that the government was tightening credit and said lending in August should improve.Chinese stock markets were little changed after the news. While markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen fell more than half a percent after the midmorning announcement, they later rebounded and closed nearly flat. The Hang Seng Index in Hong Kong, dominated by mainland companies or companies with strong financial bonds to mainland China, ended up 0.8 percent.