KABUL, Afghanistan — Thousands of supporters of the presidential candidate Abdullah Abdullah poured into the streets of Kabul on Friday, blocking roads and clogging squares as they demanded that allegations of election fraud be addressed before ending the political crisis that has stratified Afghanistan for the last two weeks.It was the second such protest on behalf of Mr. Abdullah, who has accused his opponent, Ashraf Ghani, of orchestrating widespread ballot stuffing with the help of the nation’s election commission. This time, however, as many as 15,000 people crammed into the streets of the capital, a show of force that eclipsed past efforts and drew people from well outside of the city.The protests again remained nonviolent, and again were largely young males from the country’s ethnic Tajik and Hazara populations, who form Mr. Abdullah’s support base. Different this time was Mr. Abdullah’s presence, standing on top of a moving vehicle, clutching a large Afghan flag while waving to a sea of admirers.But a strain of tension and animosity visible at the earlier protest seemed amplified on Friday, as the stasis over the election dragged into its 13th day.“We are gathered here to show our unity and convey our message that either separate the fraudulent votes from the actual ones or we will continue our protest violently,” said Faiz Agha, a 23-year-old student.Sherin Agha, 40, a former mujahedeen fighter, said, “If our demands are not fulfilled, be assured Afghanistan will face a serious crisis. We will go to the mountains, take weapons and fight for our rights until we are responded with convincing answers.”The protests are but the latest maneuver by the Abdullah campaign, which has already leaked two sets of recordings that supporters say show election officials and key government employees engaging in fraudulent behavior on behalf of Mr. Ghani.Mr. Abdullah, a former foreign minister and longtime opposition leader, has demanded a halt to the vote count and then turned his back outright on the process, convinced it was rigged. He has also called for the United Nations to be involved, and for the firing of the top election official embroiled in the fraud scandal to resign, both of which occurred.A former finance minister, Mr. Ghani has vehemently denied the allegations and promised to throw out any improper ballots cast for his side. Both sides agree that, at this point, the June 14 runoff election between the two men has Mr. Ghani ahead by more than a million votes.The recordings include several conversations where a man who is believed to be a top elections officer urges his underlings to “stuff the sheep,” shorthand for ballot boxes, according to the Abdullah campaign’s account. They also include exhortations by a man who is believed to be the governor of Wardak Province to an army officer to allow fraud to be committed on behalf of ethnic Pashtuns, of which Mr. Ghani is a member.Mr. Ghani says that he does not have a relationship with either man.In many respects, Mr. Abdullah’s actions have been defined by his experience as a top contender in the 2009 election. Then, he ran against President Hamid Karzai in an election that was marred by widespread fraud. After the international community stepped in to force Mr. Karzai into a runoff, Mr. Abdullah stepped down, convinced the process would never work on his behalf.This time he has promised he will not make the same mistake. And day-by-day, he makes good on that promise, holding news conferences, producing evidence and summoning his supporters onto the street. What he wants, his campaign says, is a system by which his vote will not be subsumed by what they say are the two million fraudulent ballots cast for Mr. Ghani.Mr. Ghani, for his part, has questioned the legitimacy of the recordings and said that Mr. Abdullah cannot threaten democracy by thwarting the process — or threatening violence through his protesters.“The two teams reached the semifinals, and they accepted the results before they entered into the contest for the finals,” Mr. Ghani said at a news conference on Thursday. “When the game is near the finish line, one team now says we don’t accept the results.”The United Nations has agreed to play a role in breaking the impasse, though the extent of that involvement remains in question. Campaign officials for Mr. Abdullah have discussed a number of options to get around a process they have deemed illegitimate, including the implementation of a system of triggers used to identify fraudulent ballots.The international community, including James F. Dobbins, the United States representative to the region, has urged the Abdullah campaign to return to the process. Mr. Dobbins met separately with both candidates in Afghanistan this week, and urged them to cooperate with the electoral process.Increasingly, the two campaigns are facing off not just at the polls but in the court of public opinion.Privately, campaign staff for Mr. Abdullah have promised to continue leaking evidence of the “industrial scale” fraud until Mr. Ghani acknowledges that his campaign has played a role in the outcome that favored him.The election commission is set to announce partial results of the vote by July 2, which it has delayed to bring Mr. Abdullah back into the process.A host of urgent matters is facing the new president, including signing a security agreement with the United States that would secure 9,800 troops in Afghanistan beyond December and pave the way for military and civilian aid. Mr. Ghani says the process must continue.“The international calendar cannot wait for Afghanistan’s current government to leave,” Mr. Ghani said. “People want certainty, not ambiguity. The people of Afghanistan do not have time.”