Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• On Ebola’s trail.National health officials are rethinking Ebola protocols after a nurse who treated Thomas Eric Duncan before he died last week became infected despite wearing protective gear.More than 50 hospital workers who treated Mr. Duncan will now be added to monitoring for signs of the virus.• Star athlete returns to court.The sentencing phase of the Oscar Pistorius trial began in South Africa today.A probation officer said that Mr. Pistorius, an Olympian and Paralympian, should serve house arrest and community service for the fatal shooting of his girlfriend.• The newest Nobel.Jean Tirole, a Frenchman, has won the Nobel Prize in economics for his work on the best way to regulate large, powerful firms in industries.• Marching on.Crowds of protesters are engaging in acts of civil disobedience around the St. Louis region today, the last of four days of rallies that brought hundreds of people from across the nation to question police conduct.• Scuffles in Hong Kong.The peaceful pro-democracy protests against Beijing entered their third week today, but a group fed up with the disruptions tried to charge at the demonstrators.• Same-sex weddings move north.Gay couples can begin applying for marriage licenses today in Alaska, where a federal judge on Sunday struck down the state’s ban.• Weather alerts.Typhoon Vongfong made landfall on Japan’s main islands this morning. Hundreds of thousands of people have evacuated their homes, and dozens have been injured.India’s east coast was pummeled by a powerful cyclone on Sunday.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks  are flat; European shares are rising, and Asian indexes closed down.• Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) makes its debut today on the New York Stock Exchange.• J.C. Penney said today that a Home Depot executive would become its next chief.OVER THE WEEKEND• Various nations pledged billions for Gaza reconstruction at a donor conference in Cairo.• Evo Morales, a leftist allied with Venezuela’s socialist-inspired government, appears to have won a third straight term as president of Bolivia.• A seventh teenager charged in connection with a series of sexual assaults, which were described as part of a high school football team’s hazing ritual, surrendered to the police in New Jersey.• In college football, No. 3 Mississippi State topped No. 2 Auburn, 38-23. And No. 5 Baylor scored 24 points in the last 11 minutes, including a field goal as time ran out, to defeat Texas Christian, 61-58. Mississippi State is now No. 1.• David Fincher’s thriller “Gone Girl,” about a monstrously failed marriage, led the box office for the second consecutive week. The novel on which it is based is at No. 1 on The New York Times’s fiction best-sellers list.• Catching up on TV: We have your episode recaps for “Homeland,” “Boardwalk Empire,” “The Good Wife” and the debut of Showtime’s “The Affair.”NOTEWORTHY• Cardinals get the last word.St. Louis, which had the fewest home runs in the National League during the regular season, hit four in Game 2 of the championship series to beat the Giants, 5-4, and tie the series.In the American League, the Royals come home to Kansas City for tonight’s game (8 o’clock Eastern, TBS) with a 2-0 series lead. They defeated the Baltimore Orioles with late-game heroics on Friday and Saturday.• What the Clooneys want.The human rights lawyer Amal Alamuddin Clooney is in Athens today, advising the Greek government in its attempt to repatriate the Parthenon Marbles from England.She and her husband, George, are also scheduled to meet with the prime minister during their four-day visit. Mr. Clooney has supported the return of the sculptures to Greece.• Lives saved.A British woman whose kidneys were failing is recovering today after receiving an organ donation from a stranger who read of her plight in the local newspaper.And two New York City police officers ran onto railroad tracks in the Bronx to save a woman from an oncoming train on Saturday night.BACK STORYFighters with the Islamic State group have spent the last month trying to capture the Syrian town of Kobani, despite U.S.-led airstrikes targeting them.Capturing the town would give the militants full control of a long stretch of the border with Turkey, something Turkey urgently wants to avoid.But nearby Turkish troops and tanks have been standing idle.That’s because Kobani’s population is Kurdish, and Turkey’s president is afraid of strengthening the Kurds.He knows that Kobani’s fall would set the Syrian Kurds back in their quest for autonomy.And he hopes that it would discourage restive Kurds in Turkey, thousands of whom died in a separatist guerrilla campaign that lasted decades.Rebel commanders involved in that fight have threatened to resume their battle within Turkey if the government does not help save Kobani.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Email us at briefing@nytimes.com.