In the race for most eccentric contemporary author, whoever’s in second place probably can’t see Carolyn Chute. The writer, whose novel “Treat Us Like Dogs and We Will Become Wolves” is reviewed by Bill Roorbach this week, lives several turns off the beaten path in western Maine, where she founded the 2nd Maine Militia. In a 2008 profile of Chute in The Times, Charles McGrath described the group’s political philosophy as “essentially one of cheerful, nonpartisan economic populism.”Chute has called the group part of a “no wing” militia movement that mingles with people on the right- and left-hand sides of the ideological spectrum. In a piece for the New Democracy Newsletter in 2000, she wrote: “Our goal is for citizens to feel like a sovereign power first before they take the big step of cutting the corporate jugular, of dismantling corporate power.” In the same piece, she described a favorite gun that “moves like a powerful but friendly little animal against the shoulder as you fire it.”Ken Rosen, who taught Chute creative writing, once told The Washington Post: “She was writing about rural poor people, Maine people, from an angle I’d never seen before, looking up at them instead of looking down on them.”Chute is as unclassifiable and unruly in her books as she is in person. Assessing the novel “The School on Heart’s Content Road” in the Book Review in 2008, Stacey D’Erasmo wrote: “Form doesn’t just follow feeling in these pages, it chases it helplessly with a butterfly net, casting about in multiple directions, sometimes succeeding, sometimes failing. But watching Chute miss what she’s after is more interesting than watching a lesser, better behaved writer catch tidier prey.”Quotable“Something that makes a really great literary character would often make a horrible roommate, or friend, or boyfriend. And that’s why they’re so fun to read about and it’s so great that they don’t exist.” — Mallory Ortberg, author of “Texts From Jane Eyre,” in an interview— with The New RepublicIntimidating SubjectsHermione Lee, whose biography of Penelope Fitzgerald is reviewed this week, once told The Paris Review, “You would have to be an idiot to take on board writing the life of Virginia Woolf or Edith Wharton without any apprehension.” Luckily for readers, Lee overcame that trepidation with those subjects and several others.In the Book Review in 1997, Daphne Merkin called Lee’s biography of Woolf “a discerning and utterly absorbing account of the cost of female genius and the interplay of the forces that shape an individual life,” and said that Lee “has performed the impossible: She has rescued Virginia Woolf from her iconic standing and restored her to human dimensions.”