LONDON — In a long-range purge, President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, traveling in Asia, ordered further dismissals of government ministers back home, pursuing a sweeping crackdown on perceived disloyalty, according to state news media on Monday.The upheaval in Zimbabwe has coincided with wider indications of unease across southern Africa after the death in October of President Michael Sata in neighboring Zambia.In an emailed statement on Monday, however, Guy Scott, Zambia’s acting president and Africa’s only white leader, indicated that a bitter public feud in the governing Patriotic Front between him and Defense Minister Edgar Lungu had been resolved and that the two men were united “behind the Lungu candidature” for presidential elections on Jan. 20.Earlier, a faction loyal to Mr. Scott had supported Miles Sampa, a nephew of Mr. Sata’s, as a presidential candidate.Over the weekend, Mr. Scott and Mr. Lungu appeared together at a rally and publicly committed themselves to Mr. Lungu’s candidacy, Zambian newspapers reported. The actions seemed to end a dispute that had threatened the country’s reputation for relative tranquillity and stability.In Zimbabwe, five deputy ministers were dismissed for “alleged graft and factional politics through which they sought to topple President Mugabe through unconstitutional means, including assassination,” The Herald, a state-run newspaper, reported on Monday, citing an official announcement late on Sunday.The removals brought to 16 the number of senior officials, including Vice President Joice Mujuru, dismissed by Mr. Mugabe, 90, in a broad purge of his ZANU-PF party that has helped elevate his wife, Grace Mugabe, 49, to high office. He has also appointed Emmerson Mnangagwa, a longtime associate with a reputation for ruthlessness, as vice president.Mr. Mugabe has governed his country since its independence from Britain in 1980.The most prominent of the figures to lose their jobs on Sunday were Flora Buka, the minister of state for presidential affairs, and Sylvester Nguni, the minister of state in the vice president’s office. It was not immediately clear what role Mr. Mnangagwa played in the latest maneuvers. The Mugabes left this month on what the state news media has called annual leave until Jan. 15.Mr. Mugabe’s overseas trips provoke much speculation among Zimbabweans that he is receiving medical treatment during protracted journeys to Asia, particularly to Singapore, the magazine The Africa Report said on its website.The Africa Report also said that, along with speculation about his health, “it is the financing of Mugabe’s vacation that has come under the spotlight.” It added that money from the national budget “has been spent on travel, entertainment, cars” and the maintenance of residences.Mr. Mugabe has visited Asia with increasing frequency since Western governments imposed travel restrictions because of his human rights record. China, a historical ally of ZANU-PF, has since emerged as a leading economic partner.In Zambia, news of the reconciliation within the governing party drew a skeptical response from rivals.“The purported reconciliation in the Patriotic Front is not rooted in truth,” Nevers Mumba, an opposition presidential contender and former vice president, said in an emailed statement. “It has been forced on the two factions purely for the purposes of creating a reasonable environment for the forthcoming elections.”He added, though, that he and his followers in the fractious Movement for Multiparty Democracy “pray that the temporary Band-Aid holds until Election Day in order to facilitate a free and fair election.”