The National Archives released 10,000 more pages of previously undisclosed documents from the Clinton White House on Friday, with topics including Hillary Rodham Clinton’s ill-fated attempt as first lady to overhaul the health care system.Previous disclosures often shed new light on elements of the Clinton presidency, including the administration’s scrambles after the Republicans won control of the House in 1994 and after the Monica Lewinsky scandal began to envelop the White House in 1998.The latest disclosures are posted on the website of the William J. Clinton Library.A First Lady Plots Her Own Political PathIn the fall of 1999, Mrs. Clinton’s staff faced a unique challenge: Figuring out how a sitting first lady could explore a run for the United States Senate. Should Mrs. Clinton’s exploratory campaign committee or taxpayers pay for her trips to New York? What if she meets with United Nations officials and attends a fund-raiser?The conclusion: The government would pay travel costs of Secret Service agents, the White House photographer, doctors and personal aides when Mrs. Clinton traveled to New York; the campaign would pay for travel of any aides related to her run for Senate.The math over how to split these costs was broken down in excruciating detail in these memos. A trip to Binghamton, N.Y., and New York City included “43 percent official; 22 percent exploratory committee; 36 percent political,” read one memo from the first lady’s office.The memos highlight the untraditional tenure of Mrs. Clinton, whose political ambition and policy involvement often overshadowed the traditional role of a first lady.Mrs. Clinton’s role in overseeing the secretive Health Care Task Force prompted a lawsuit over whether the first lady was a private citizen or a public official. (A United States Court of Appeals declared the first lady to be a government official exempt from some disclosure requirements.)The attempt at a health care overhaul represented a trial by fire for Mrs. Clinton, who was accused of overseeing a secretive and dysfunctional task force led by an aide, Ira Magaziner.In a memo dated April 1995, Mr. Magaziner explains in detail his efforts to persuade the news media to report more positively on the failed task force, including a list of names of Clinton aides whom he believed to be sources on articles critical of the president and first lady’s efforts at a health care overhaul.“I seethe inside when I think of how disloyal some administration officials have been to you and the president and how hurtful they have been to me in their private discussions with the press,” Mr. Magaziner wrote to Mrs. Clinton.— Amy ChozickAfter a Suicide, a Cryptic Note From the PresidentOne of the most intriguing documents released on Friday is an otherwise blank sheet of paper with a cryptic note in President Clinton’s familiar left-hand scrawl.The paper is dated June 14, 1994. “H.R.C.,” it says, using the initials for Hillary Rodham Clinton. “What did we ever decide to do on this?” And then it is signed, “B.C.”Whatever “this” was is not mentioned. The paper was in a file marked “Vince Foster,” referring to the longtime friend of Mrs. Clinton who came from Arkansas to serve as White House deputy counsel but then committed suicide. The day before the date marked on the document, both Mr. and Mrs. Clinton were interviewed by Robert Fiske, the independent counsel then looking into Mr. Foster’s death.— Peter BakerManaging a Sex ScandalOn March 26, 1996, a young White House aide sent an email message up the chain of command. “This is an official request to hang the picture of President Clinton signing the telecomm bill in our office,” the aide wrote. It was signed, “Thank you. Monica Lewinsky.”A month later, the young Ms. Lewinsky would be banished from the White House, dispatched to the nether regions of the administration by presidential advisers trying to protect the president. “Our direction is to make sure she has a job in an agency,” Patsy Thomasson, the deputy White House personnel director, wrote in a message. “We are working toward that end.”The ultimately tragicomic White House tenure of Ms. Lewinsky echoes through some of the documents released on Friday. In hundreds of pages related to the scandal that would, to her everlasting chagrin, forever bear her name, Ms. Lewinsky is largely an off-screen character discussed endlessly by all the other players, with her own voice coming through in just that single banal, one-sentence request.Also missing from the file are the voices of two other protagonists, Mr. and Mrs. Clinton. But the papers pull back the curtain a bit on the frenzied efforts by the people around them to deal with the burgeoning political furor touched off by the president’s sexual liaison with Ms. Lewinsky that would lead to his impeachment by the House and acquittal by the Senate.According to the papers, Mr. Clinton received a letter from Keith Olbermann, who had left sportscasting to become a political broadcaster, apologizing for “whatever part I may have played in perpetuating this ceaseless coverage” and promising to leave the news business and head “back to my previous career in sports as quickly as possible.”A note drafted for Mr. Clinton to send in reply had the president saying, “I’m grateful you got in touch with me, and I send you my very best wishes.”White House aides debated whether to forgive others they deemed complicit in fanning the flames. Mickey Ibarra, a White House aide, wrote about speaking with Gov. Parris Glendening of Maryland after he criticized Mr. Clinton. “I delivered our message (it does not help any of us to pile on),” Mr. Ibarra wrote.When the radio host Tom Joyner made comments on his show that irritated Clinton aides, one sent a message saying they should remember that the next time he asked for an interview. Another countered that Mr. Joyner was mostly on the president’s side and besides they would need him in the future. “Politics baby!!!!!” the aide wrote.Sidney Blumenthal, a White House adviser close to Mrs. Clinton, wrote a series of messages aimed at undercutting key players in the episode. He referred to “the plotters” who were promoting the scandal and called the journalist Michael Isikoff, then of Newsweek, a “coconspirator.”He suggested that Linda Tripp, who taped Ms. Lewinsky talking about her relationship with the president and then turned over the recordings to the independent counsel Kenneth W. Starr, may have falsified talking points she said Ms. Lewinsky had given her. If so, Mr. Blumenthal wrote, “Tripp would be a liar, a worthless witness and open to prosecution herself for lying to F.B.I. investigators.”As for Lucianne Goldberg, the literary agent who helped Ms. Tripp bring the original accusations to Mr. Isikoff at Newsweek, Mr. Blumenthal sent a message to the reporter David Corn questioning her integrity. In the message, Mr. Blumenthal wrote that Ms. Goldberg had been sued by the author Kitty Kelley “for stealing a lot of money from her” and suggested Mr. Corn call Ms. Kelley. “Do you want Kitty’s phone number?” he asked. “I think she’d talk on background.”Also evident in the files is a certain resignation by Clinton aides mystified by the whole episode. Paul Begala, the longtime Clinton strategist, wrote to a White House aide in 1999 looking for help in coming up with lines for an event to be presided over by the NBC journalist Tim Russert. Mr. Begala wanted to be prepared for what he presumed would be the line of questioning.“Russert asked me 13 times in one interview what the president’s relationship with Monica Lewinsky was,” Mr. Begala wrote, trying out a line. “Hell, I don’t even know what his relationship with Al Gore is.”— Peter BakerDamage Control Over Whitewater DealMore than 1,000 pages of the documents released on Friday concern the Whitewater investigation in the mid-1990s of an Arkansas real estate deal involving the first couple. Among the legal opinions, talking points and chronologies in the documents are many memos focused on how to portray the Clintons in the most favorable light.• An unsigned memo for the president from March 1994, titled “Key Points on Whitewater for Press Conference,” said, “You and Hillary have done nothing wrong. This whole affair involves an unsuccessful investment in a minor real estate deal nearly 16 years ago. Defend H.R.C. Stress her ethics and accomplishments as a lawyer and in doing public service work. A person whose life and career have exemplified highest ethical standards and integrity.• In another memo written that same month, a political adviser, Paul Begala, urged the Clintons to do a joint interview on primetime television. “They must be relaxed, open and forthcoming. Any sense of bitterness, anger or righteous indignation will not work,” he wrote. “A word about interaction: Mandy observes that in many joint interviews, the president defers to the first lady. This may or may not be real, and it might be as simple as Southern manners, but it’s important that the president take the lead on this issue.”• A January 1995 memo suggests that a “Whitewater Team” be formed, the purpose of which would be to “develop and implement a coherent offensive and defensive White House strategy for responding to inquiries directed at the character of the president or Mrs. Clinton.” The proposed team was to include more than a dozen people, including lawyers, press assistants and a researcher. “The team’s central focus will be issues that involve direct challenges to the character of the president or Mrs. Clinton,” the memo said.— Kitty BennettLast-Minute Pleas for ClemencyIn his final days in office, President Bill Clinton and his staff were being lobbied by a host of friends arguing for pardons or other executive clemency, including one of his former lawyers, a former president and a future adviser to the current president.But none of the documents released on Friday warned him of the firestorm that would erupt with his last-minute acts of clemency.The most controversial of the pardons eventually issued went to the financier Marc Rich, and the documents include a letter from Dec. 19, 2000, about Mr. Rich that was sent to a Clinton aide, Bruce Lindsey, by a former White House counsel, Jack Quinn. In the letter, Mr. Quinn cited a conversation with Mr. Lindsey while in Belfast about the pardon request for Mr. Rich, his client.“You expressed a concern that they are fugitives; and I told you they are not,” Mr. Quinn wrote, referring to Mr. Rich and Pincus Green, his partner. Mr. Quinn went on to explain that Mr. Rich and Mr. Green were living in Switzerland when they were indicted in 1983. So rather than fleeing the indictments they simply “chose not to return to the U.S. for a trial.”“Their failure to return to New York was not a crime, and no one has ever accused them of a crime for failing to come to the U.S. for a trial,” Mr. Quinn wrote.The letter came just a few days after Mr. Quinn sent a handwritten note to Mr. Lindsey. “I am told that Barak also raised the Marc Rich matter with the president, as has at least one other person who was told that you and I should discuss it,” Mr. Quinn wrote in that note, referring to Ehud Barak, then the Israeli prime minister.In another plea, former President Jimmy Carter and his wife, Rosalynn, weighed in on behalf of two inmates on death row, Juan Raul Garza and David Paul Hammer, arguing that Mr. Clinton should spare them because of problems with the application of capital punishment in America.“Renewing federal executions under these circumstances would undermine your lifelong commitment to equal justice at home,” they wrote.And Harold Hongju Koh, then the assistant secretary of state for democracy, human rights and labor who would go on to become President Obama’s top State Department legal adviser for a time, also wrote the White House about Mr. Garza, who was then scheduled to be the first federal inmate executed in nearly 40 years.Mr. Koh advocated a moratorium on federal executions because of evidence of racial disparity in the justice system. “One of President Clinton’s greatest legacies will be his commitment to racial justice and equality,” Mr. Koh wrote. A moratorium “would reaffirm that legacy.”In the end, Mr. Clinton pardoned Mr. Rich and Mr. Green. He postponed Mr. Garza’s execution, but the convict was put to death in June 2001 after President George W. Bush refused to grant clemency.Mr. Hammer’s execution was postponed and his death sentence was later overturned by a judge because the prosecution had withheld statements that might have helped him. He was resentenced to life in prison, a sentence reaffirmed this summer.— Peter BakerWas Bill Clinton a Trekkie? The revelation of presidential affair with a young aide would be a public relations nightmare for any White House, but some aides kept a sense of humor about it in their correspondence.Mr. Clinton was preparing for a news conference in 1999 a week before an interview Ms. Lewinsky gave to Barbara Walters was set to air. Anticipating that reporters would ask the president whether he planned to watch the interview, James Kennedy, a White House spokesman, passed along a suggested response to his colleague, Amy Weiss.Mr. Kennedy wrote that Mr. Clinton should say, “I have already expressed my regret for what she and others have had to go through because of things I have said and done. I wish her well in whatever she does.”But that was not Mr. Kennedy’s original idea. He first thought about letting Mr. Clinton say bluntly that he would not be watching television that day. Frustrated that a lawyer struck that line from the proposed response, Mr. Kennedy suggested that Joe Lockhart, the White House press secretary, offer an intergalactic response.“Perhaps Joe, if asked, can say he usually watches ‘Star Trek: Voyager’ at that hour,” Mr. Kennedy wrote. Here’s the interview Mr. Clinton might have missed while he was possibly watching the prequel to the original “Star Trek” series:— Alan RappeportHollywood Strikes BackMr. Clinton found some of his strongest financial support among Hollywood moguls who were not too happy when the White House introduced a Summit on Violence in the Media in the wake of the 1999 high school shooting in Columbine, Colo. In one memo, a senior adviser, Minyon Moore, writes that Andy Spahn, an adviser to several megadonors in the entertainment industry, had expressed concern about the summit meeting.“He indicated that if this was another attempt by the White House and Congress to attack the entertainment industry and not to talk specifically about guns, that this would greatly affect” a fund-raiser scheduled with Mr. Clinton in Los Angeles, Ms. Moore wrote.In another memo, a White House aide informs Mr. Clinton’s office that David Geffen, the producer and prominent Democratic donor, wanted his foundation mentioned at the summit meeting. “Andy Spahn from his office will try to roll us on this,” the aide wrote. “How do you want me to handle their pressure?”— Amy Chozick