SEOUL, South Korea —  No one galvanized South Korea’s national pride as he did, and no scandal in recent years unsettled the country as much as his.Hwang Woo-suk became an international sensation a decade ago when he claimed to have cloned a human embryo and produced a stem-cell line from it for the first time in history. He further cemented his fame when he later claimed that his team had generated cloned stem cells that matched the DNA of patients, another purported scientific first that promised hope for curing diseases.The government, eager to develop a world-class research reputation to add to its economic achievements, named Dr. Hwang a “supreme scientist.” It issued a postage stamp in his honor showing a paralyzed man rising from his wheelchair. Korean Air offered him free seats in first class for 10 years. And women volunteered to donate eggs for his experiments.“I created an illusion and made it look as if it were real,” Dr. Hwang said recently in one of the few interviews he has given since investigators concluded he and his research team had perpetrated one of the biggest scientific frauds in modern history. “I was drunk in the bubble I created.”Now, eight years after Seoul National University dismissed him for leaving what its president called “an ineradicable blemish on the entire scientific community,” Dr. Hwang, 61, is moving forward with his push for a scientific breakthrough of a different sort: a comeback that will allow him to return to research on human stem cells.His attempt has ignited debate over whether he is trying, once again, to dupe the world, or is instead who he says he is: a person “with a big stain” who is simply asking for a second chance.Supporters contend that he was the victim of a conspiracy to discredit him. Critics argue that, despite his acknowledgment of widespread fabrication in his earlier scientific papers, he continues to claim that his signature — and widely discredited — accomplishment was real, that he did extract a stem cell from a cloned human embryo.Some of Dr. Hwang’s methods for seeking vindication have only increased his critics’ skepticism. He is trying to bolster his case by winning patents for his work, his latest in February from the United States. But even the patent office acknowledges it operates on an honor system and cannot vouch for his stated achievements.“By going to patent officials to get recognition he could not in the scientific community, Dr. Hwang is once again appealing to popular sentiments to pave the way for his return,” said Kim Byung-soo, a deputy director at the Center for Democracy in Science and Technology, a civic group in Seoul.Dr. Hwang’s efforts to rebuild his credibility began years ago. He has lived a low-key yet driven life, rebuilding a lab with some researchers who decamped from Seoul National University to follow him.Disgraced, he moved them from one rented space to another, focusing on his one skill that no one disputes: animal cloning. In 2005, Dr. Hwang, a former veterinary professor, unveiled Snuppy, widely acknowledged to be the world’s first cloned dog.These days, Dr. Hwang says he can make up to $100,000 per cloned animal, many for owners desperate to replicate their pets, and has helped rebuild his lab in part on that income. His research, meanwhile, has focused on using cloning skills and genetic engineering to create animal models of human diseases such as Alzheimer’s, as well as pigs he hopes might one day grow organs that could be transplanted to humans.In 2012, Dr. Hwang settled the 40 researchers of his Sooam Biotech Research Foundation into a new five-story building on a hillside in southern Seoul.Photos of cloned dogs hang on the walls, and exuberant puppies in cages paw at visitors. During a recent visit by a reporter, Dr. Hwang donned a blue surgical gown and transplanted 14 canine embryos into a surrogate mother dog. He said the dog, a mutt, was likely to bear two or three replicas of an owner’s beloved German shepherd.His approach to redemption, after years of cultivating an outsize reputation, has started to pay off.Since 2006, respected journals have accepted 43 papers from Sooam about its animal research, and government grants have begun trickling in again. He has also won some respect.“He is a hard-working and perseverant scientist who made some mistakes,” said Cindy Tian, a cloning expert at the University of Connecticut who mentioned specific successes by Dr. Hwang in animal research and who has edited some of his recent papers. “No one should be forbidden a second chance.”Dr. Hwang’s fall from grace began in 2005, when a former junior colleague turned whistle-blower. Disbelieving supporters placed pink flowers on the path leading to his lab at Seoul National University, praying for him to return to work there. He never did.After an investigation of claims he made in papers published in 2004 and 2005, the university concluded that Dr. Hwang had unethically collected human eggs, including some from junior colleagues. He denied the accusations. The university raised doubts about the original stem-cell line reported in 2004 and concluded that he and his team created none of the 11 stem-cell lines that he claimed it did in the 2005 paper, substituting cells from a fertility clinic.Dr. Hwang was convicted of embezzling research funds and violating the bioethics law in 2010, and he was sentenced to a suspended two-year prison term.Prosecutors eventually placed much of the blame on a junior researcher, who worked on most of the stem-cell lines and who they said told Dr. Hwang the cells were created by cloning. Dr. Hwang said he was duped, but he admitted he asked his workers to inflate the number of stem-cell lines created to meet what he perceived as high expectations from a country intoxicated by his success. He also admitted asking his workers to falsify some of the data for the paper on the first stem-cell line to expedite the paper’s publication.In the end, the government revoked Dr. Hwang’s license for human stem-cell research. On Thursday, South Korea’s Supreme Court upheld his suspended sentence.Prosecutors did not draw a final conclusion about whether the initial stem-cell line, called NT-1, that Dr. Hwang claimed to have created through cloning was legitimate, saying it was most likely a result of cloning but that the question of its authenticity should be left to scientists. That is the stem-cell line that has received patents from the United States and Canada.Some scientists have expressed dismay with Dr. Hwang’s latest attempt for recognition.“I believe everyone deserves a chance for redemption, but if Dr. Hwang is trying to establish that his NT-1 cell line is a true clone, he is making another scientific mistake,” said George Q. Daley, a stem-cell expert at Harvard Medical School. Dr. Daley said that his lab’s DNA analysis determined that NT-1 was the world’s first human embryonic stem-cell line created by parthenogenesis, a process that has nothing to do with cloning. Seoul National University had suspected the same, though another paper by South Korean scientists later claimed that the cell line indeed derived from cloning.Even before the final verdict on his conviction on Thursday, supporters and critics alike have begun asking if Dr. Hwang should be allowed back into research on human stem cells.“If we let someone like him, whose scandal will remain in the history of science, what would the world think of our country’s scientific system?” asked Dr. Kim, of the Center for Democracy in Science and Technology. Critics have attributed Dr. Hwang’s scandal not only to personal misconduct but also to a culture where all that often mattered in the race to catch up with advanced countries was results.Others say Dr. Hwang has been punished enough.Even if Dr. Hwang were allowed to return to research on human stem cells, he would find it much different from 10 years ago. Newer methods that do not require the creation of embryos have been developed to make stem cells. And last year, a team of researchers in Oregon reported that it had used cloning to create human embryonic stem cells, a feat his lab claimed to have accomplished many years before.