For almost 15 years, the long-teased third album from the embattled soul singer D’Angelo came not at all. Then, on Sunday, the album — “Black Messiah” — came all at once, debuting at an industry listening party in the sleek rooftop lounge of a Manhattan hotel.The writer Nelson George, who introduced the record and broke the news of its imminent commercial arrival, said some employees of RCA, D’Angelo’s label, were only then hearing the album for the first time. Before midnight, “Black Messiah” was available on iTunes, and by Monday the CD was in stores.D’Angelo and RCA, partly inspired by the nationwide protests over the police killings of unarmed black men, had moved up the release of “Black Messiah” and spent the past month working many all-nighters to decide everything from the track list to the album art, according to interviews with D’Angelo’s collaborators and confidants.After a grand jury didn’t indict a Ferguson, Mo., police officer last month in the fatal shooting of Michael Brown, D’Angelo called his co-manager Kevin Liles. “He said: ‘Do you believe this? Do you believe it?’ ” Mr. Liles said. “And then we just sat there in silence. That is when I knew he wanted to say something.” (D’Angelo declined to be interviewed for this article.)RCA had planned to release “Black Messiah” in early 2015, but its reclusive singer was done waiting. “The one way I do speak out is through music,” D’Angelo told his tour manager, Alan Leeds. “I want to speak out.”Combining the chronic delays (and fan incredulity) of Guns N’ Roses’ “Chinese Democracy,” which took Axl Rose 14 years and nearly as many band members to finish, and the industry-shaking surprise download strategy Beyoncé used for her self-titled album last year, “Black Messiah” hit like an earthquake.The album, when it finally arrived, came without the traditional monthslong major-label rollout, which typically includes sending a single to radio stations and building buzz with press and public appearances.Peter Edge, chief executive of RCA Music Group, said D’Angelo liked the idea of the record’s “just appearing.” Mr. Edge chafed at the idea that Beyoncé owns that concept. (Kid Cudi, Skrillex and others have opted for similar release tactics.)“Of course, she started something with that, but this couldn’t be more different in terms of the record,” he said. “That was a ‘visual album’; this is a musical album.”With frenetic instrumentation and lyrics alluding to race and violence, Mr. Edge added, “it’s really caught the zeitgeist of what’s going on.”Russell Elevado, D’Angelo’s longtime studio engineer and mixer, said he put the finishing touches on the album only about three weeks ago. “It’s pretty much right out of the oven — it’s still hot,” he said.The pair began work on what would become “Black Messiah” after D’Angelo’s 2000 tour for “Voodoo,” his previous album. “We’ve been close for the past two and a half years,” Mr. Elevado said, after they worked on and off for well over a decade between the singer’s trips to rehab and self-imposed exile.“It’s fair to say that there were a lot of revisions on songs,” Mr. Elevado said. “Sometimes it was just a specific lyric that wasn’t quite right.”He recalled recording sessions that went on for three days straight, partly because the album was recorded entirely analog, on two-inch reel-to-reel tape. If work on one song wasn’t clicking, he explained, it could take up to two hours to pull up a new one. “It’s not just moving a mouse around,” he said.The finished album used about 200 reels of tape, Mr. Elevado estimated, and “that alone is more than most budgets for entire projects.”While D’Angelo’s team declined to reveal the album’s total budget, Mr. Leeds said that “there are probably 25 accountants trying to figure that out, and none of them agree.”With the track list whittled down to 12 songs from more than 20 “really strong contenders,” Mr. Elevado said, the label looked to Afropunk, an arts group and creative agency, to direct the album’s art, marketing materials and more.Afropunk’s work on “Black Messiah” often went until 4 a.m., including time spent deciphering the dense, distorted vocals for a lyric booklet. That was still too late to make the CD, but it will be included in the forthcoming vinyl version.“We were able to put six months’ worth of work into two weeks,” said Jocelyn Cooper, Afropunk’s co-founder and D’Angelo’s music publisher, who signed him as an unknown teenager in 1993. D’Angelo is “a bit of a vampire,” she added. “It’s easier to get ahold of him at 2 a.m.”The singer, ever the perfectionist, was involved at every step. D’Angelo had hoped to commission art for the album from Emory Douglas, once the minister of culture for the Black Panthers and art director for the group’s newspaper, but Matthew Morgan, an Afropunk co-founder, said there wasn’t time to wait for original illustrations.Instead, the cover shows a black-and-white still from a 16-millimeter film shot at Afropunk’s annual concert, which D’Angelo headlined last summer.“That image was captured during the festival when we were asking the audience to put their hands up in protest,” Mr. Morgan said. “But it was also symbolic of praise in church,” he added, saying that D’Angelo, a Pentecostal preacher’s son, “loved it immediately.”Not all details were so well received. The font used on the album materials, for instance: As with the record, Ms. Cooper said, “he wanted to tweak it a lot more.”D’Angelo believed it was “too clean and structured,” she said. “He wanted something that was more free-flowing, that more reflected anarchy and urgency and revolution.”Ultimately, D’Angelo gave in. “He’s probably still not convinced,” Mr. Morgan said. “It’s not what he wanted, perhaps, but he’ll live with it. We just didn’t have time.”