TUNIS —  Tunisia’s Islamist party Ennahda ceded power on Tuesday to a caretaker government, ending a strife-ridden two years as the country’s first elected government after the Arab Spring of 2011. The government departed under pressure, criticized for failing to halt rising terrorism and steady a faltering economy, but Ennahda was nevertheless assured of its place in Tunisian politics.Prime Minister Ali Laarayedh is handing the reins of government to Mehdi Jomaa, a technocrat who was his minister for industry. Mr. Jomaa was chosen by a consensus of political parties to lead the country into elections later in the year. He presented his cabinet to the National Constituent Assembly and won approval in a vote early in the morning on Wednesday.The change of government was the last piece of a negotiated transition to resolve five months of political deadlock after the assassination of the leftist politician Mohamed Brahmi in July. Parties came together Sunday night to pass the country’s new Constitution, which was signed into law on Monday by the president, the prime minister and the speaker before the assembly.“I have a feeling of pride that our young democracy is alive despite the difficulties and trials,” Mr. Laarayedh said in a packed assembly hall at the signing ceremony. “We should be proud at what we have achieved and continue on the same road with God’s guidance, having confidence in ourselves and our people.”Ennahda came to power in 2011 after decades of persecution under the government of President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, during which the Islamist movement was outlawed and its followers barred from political life. Many of its leaders were imprisoned or exiled, including Mr. Laarayedh.The party won the largest portion of the vote in elections in October 2011 and formed a coalition government with two smaller secular parties, the Congress Party for the Republic and Ettakatol. Tasked with drawing up a new constitution and legislation and institutions for elections, Ennahda has delivered, according to supporters, even if the results of that effort came one year later than planned and after some bruising political battles.“We lived through our own experience, and we are in the process of succeeding and should be proud,” Sihem Badi, a member of the Congress Party and the departing minister for women’s affairs, said in an interview before the vote on the Constitution. “Tunisia became a real school for democracy.”Many in the coalition government expressed pride that they were giving up power without violence. The speaker of the assembly, Mustapha Ben Jaafar, said that lesson would resound in the Arab world. “The peaceful transfer of power has occurred in an extraordinary way that history will not forget,” he told the assembly and guests, including representatives from Algeria and Morocco.Despite the late-hour consensus that led to the approval of the new Constitution by a resounding majority, amid cheers and celebrations on all sides, and of the new government, opposition members remained caustic in their criticism of Ennahda’s performance while in power.“They failed on the economic, security and social levels,” said Khmais Kssila, an assembly member with Nidaa Tounes, a newly formed opposition party that has coalesced around former Prime Minister Béji Caïd Essebsi. “They did not succeed in retaining our confidence,” he added.Mongi Rahoui, another opposition lawmaker, said, “They were nil.” He pointed out the final Constitution was much different from what the Ennahda government originally presented six months ago.Ennahda struggled to govern in the freewheeling chaos of a post-revolutionary Tunisia in which popular expectations were high but few of its ministers had much experience in government. Ennahda was criticized for showing too much leniency toward Islamist extremists who began vigilante campaigns against behavior deemed un-Islamic in some neighborhoods and then turned to attacking police and army units.After the assassinations of two secular politicians last year, the criticism escalated into street protests that finally forced the suspension of the assembly. The economy declined as investor confidence collapsed, and strikes and protests disrupted work as prices rose.Ennahda members defended their party’s performance, saying that they faced not only ferocious opposition in the form of terrorism from religious extremists, but also relentless protests and strikes led by leftist opponents.“There are parts of the opposition that still have not accepted the results of the last elections,” said Jamel Bouajaja, an Ennahda member of the assembly. “They tried to hamper Ennahda’s experience in rule through the media and by refusing to accept it as a strong political influence within the authorities.”There were certainly deep-seated prejudices against Islamists. Some opposition demonstrators openly declared that all Islamists were terrorists. Ennahda’s coalition partners came under pressure too, attacked for joining the Islamists and lending them democratic support, but they saw a chance to institute changes.“In the context of the revolution, we were able to dare,” Ms. Badi said. As minister of women’s affairs, she initiated the first nationally representative survey on violence against women and opened the first center for abused women in the country.Previous governments had claimed to be progressive and support women’s rights, but had only paid lip service, while the coalition government dared to acknowledge the problems and begin to tackle them, she said. She expressed disappointment that the new leadership had not increased the number of women in government, only three, and that the women’s affairs ministry would now be led by a man because ministries had been combined.Mr. Jomaa, 51, the new prime minister, is an engineer who has spent most of his life in the private sector. He promised to tackle the two most pressing problems, terrorism and the ailing economy, in a speech to the assembly on Tuesday. He has appointed mainly independent experts to his cabinet, among them Hakim Ben Hammouda, an adviser to the African Development Bank, as his finance minister, and Mongi Hamid, a former United Nations diplomat, as his foreign minister.Ennahda retains its dominance of the assembly, the only elected body in Tunisia, and so will continue to exercise influence over legislation and as a check on the new government. By approving the new government, the assembly essentially voted its own government out of office in favor of a cabinet of nonelected independent technocrats.