WASHINGTON —  The Iowa Senate candidate Joni Ernst, a Republican, may have produced the most famous anti-spending spot of the cycle when she released a 30-second commercial during her primary race that featured her in a barn among squealing pigs.“I grew up castrating hogs on an Iowa farm, so when I get to Washington, I’ll know how to cut pork,” Ms. Ernst said, smiling at the camera.But Ms. Ernst is not alone in her disdain of pork, as lawmakers’ pet projects are dismissively known.Now, two election cycles after Congress banned earmarks and amid what political operatives say is voter anger at out-of-control spending, candidates from both parties are turning to tales of casework and constituent testimonials to show that they still managed to earn their keep.“It’s more about the things that I can do for you rather than the things that I’ve brought for you,” said Scott Frisch, a professor of political science at California State University Channel Islands and the author of “Cheese Factories on the Moon: Why Earmarks Are Good for American Democracy.” “It’s for services rather than the brick-and-mortar, concrete stuff that it’s been in the past.”Last week, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the minority leader, released an ad featuring Noelle Hunter, whose ex-husband abducted their daughter and took her to Africa. In the commercial, Ms. Hunter talked about how Mr. McConnell “took up my cause personally,” working with the State Department to bring her daughter safely home.“I can’t even talk about him without getting emotional,” Ms. Hunter said, choking up. “He cared about me and my children when other people didn’t.”Mr. McConnell’s first campaign ad this cycle was also a constituent testimonial, featuring a man who survived throat cancer after being exposed to radiation at his job, speaking about how Mr. McConnell fought on his behalf.Ads featuring voters are particularly effective now that pork has become shorthand for excessive government spending, said Elizabeth Wilner, the senior vice president for politics at Kantar Media Ad Intelligence, which monitors political advertising. “You do see testimonials because they’re a twist on pork,” Ms. Wilner said. “It’s not ‘look what I brought home’ anymore. It’s ‘look what I’m doing for the voters at home.’ ”Of course, constituent testimonial ads are hardly new. Larry McCarthy, the Republican media consultant who did the McConnell ads, said he had been doing similar ones for years. But he said spotlighting a real person could be an effective way to show the warm and compelling side of a politician.Also, in a typical election cycle with negative ads, people sharing a positive experience can break through the clutter.“There’s a need to tell a human story because a fair amount of what elected officials do is your day-in, day-out constituent casework, and there are some great stories in there,” Mr. McCarthy said.And so, elected officials across the board are turning to their constituents to make the pitch for them.Representative Chris Gibson, Republican of New York, released an ad featuring a young woman, Kaleigh Ahern, and her mother, talking about how Kaleigh contracted Lyme disease while at college. When their insurance company would not help, they turned to Mr. Gibson, who helped pass a bill that prioritizes federal research on Lyme and other similar diseases.“Congressman Gibson was willing to take this on with us, giving us a chance to be heard,” Ms. Ahern said.Senator Al Franken, Democrat of Minnesota, released an ad featuring a man whose mother died after eating salmonella-contaminated peanut butter. The man talked about how Mr. Franken had heard his story and helped pass a food safety law.And Senator Thad Cochran, Republican of Mississippi, went on the air with a spot in which Jason Graeber of Ocean Springs, Miss., talked about how Mr. Cochran’s office helped him cut through the red tape after he learned he had an inoperable brain tumor in 2009. A poor state like Mississippi, however, is more dependent on federal dollars, and during his contentious primary campaign, Mr. Cochran also happily talked up the spending he had directed to his state over the years.“It’s always great if you can find a constituent or a voter in a state that’s good on television and has a powerful message that they’ll tell in a supportive and positive way on behalf of a candidate,” said Austin Barbour, a senior adviser to the Cochran campaign.Representative Patrick Murphy, Democrat of Florida, has run a re-election ad campaign focusing on what he has done for Florida’s 18th Congressional District. His spots showcase local residents and sites like the state’s Indian River Lagoon.“I wish I could run an ad saying I was able to have a big part of tax reform or was able to balance the budget, but we haven’t had that because of the partisanship in D.C.,” Mr. Murphy said in a phone interview.Perhaps the most famous example of spending and government pork gone awry was Alaska’s so-called Bridge to Nowhere — a nearly $400 million proposal to connect Ketchikan, Alaska, to Gravina Island, Alaska, population 50.It was not entirely surprising, then, that one of the commercials that ran in support of Senator Mark Begich, Democrat of Alaska, featured the former chief executive of a telecommunications company making a seemingly pro-pork pitch.“We’re one of the only states with both senators on the Appropriations Committee,” she said of Mr. Begich and Senator Lisa Murkowski, a Republican. “We can’t afford to lose that.”Ms. Wilner said: “Alaska has always looked more kindly upon pork than the rest of the country. The Bridge to Nowhere wasn’t a joke here — it was a joke everywhere else.”