Good evening. Here’s what you need to know from NYT Now: • A missed connection. American health officials had worried for months that someone infected with Ebola might enter the United States undetected.“There have been a bunch of false alarms, where people have done their due diligence and checked everything out,” says Denise Grady, one of our science reporters.But when a man who had recently arrived from Liberia went to a hospital in Dallas on Friday, he was sent back home — only to return on Sunday, far sicker.Thomas Eric Duncan is now the first case of Ebola diagnosed in the U.S., and more than a dozen people he came into contact with while ill are being traced and monitored.A spokesman for the hospital, Texas Health Presbyterian, said Mr. Duncan told a nurse that he had just arrived from Liberia, but the information wasn’t passed to those examining him.“I don’t think there’s any doubt that that was a mistake,” Ms. Grady says.• Truth from fiction.Mostly, Hollywood has sensationalized epidemics, starting with a diagnosis and ending in civilization on the brink of demise.But some films — like Steven Soderbergh’s “Contagion”  — have also reflected on the consequences of fanning unbridled fear in the face of such a crisis, says Brooks Barnes, our entertainment industry reporter.That 2011 film was “fiction for what is essentially now fact with Ebola,” he says, “an epidemic spread by world travelers.”“But while the movie entertained with terror — it’s everywhere! — it also tried to say something serious about the media environment,” Mr. Barnes says, “and how poorly some humans can behave when they are afraid.”“The marketing slogan,” he points out, “was ‘Nothing spreads like fear.'” • Not entirely muzzled. The Chinese government has done its best to mute the message of protesters in Hong Kong demanding greater democracy.Government censors have cut images of the well-behaved protesters from social media and published articles attacking them, says Andrew Jacobs, our correspondent in Beijing.That has left many on the mainland “in the dark about the scale and the purpose of the demonstrations unfolding in the former British colony,” he says.Yet a small but vocal group is still trying to show solidarity (many shaving their heads) and spread the message, Mr. Jacobs says.Nearly two dozen people have reportedly been detained and at least 60 have been summoned for questioning, but one man — a seasoned activist with a new buzz cut — told Mr. Jacobs that he was willing to go to jail.“Freedom is earned,” the activist told him. “You need to pay the price.” • Back to baseball.The regular season is giving way to the playoffs for the World Series, with coastal clusters that are helping build excitement for a sport recently overshadowed by the N.F.L. and its troubles.“There’s four games involving Los Angeles teams over three days, and there’s four games involving the Washington-Baltimore teams over three days,” says Jay Schreiber, one of our sports editors.“That’s kind of cool.”The Kansas City Royals, who hadn’t been in the playoffs in three decades, had an “unbelievable game” against the Oakland A’s on Tuesday, winning 9-8 in extra innings, Mr. Schreiber says.“They get this game that looks hopeless for them, but every time it looks like it’s over, they rally, score, keep it going, and they finally won.”“It’s an epic kind of game, a perfect opening act.”And the last of the wild-card slots is decided as the San Francisco Giants trounce the Pittsburgh Pirates, 8-0. San Francisco will now face the Washington Nationals on Friday.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks dropped. The S.&P. 500 fell 1.3 percent.TONIGHT• Ugly.“Stalker,” a new police drama starring Dylan McDermott and the former model Maggie Q as partners in the Los Angeles Police Department, is yet another show full of women being murdered, raped and terrorized.“Maybe its excesses will be the tipping point that reins in this deplorable trend,” writes our critic Neil Genzlinger. (10 p.m. Eastern, CBS)• If you’re staying up … On “The Daily Show”: Lena Dunham of HBO’s “Girls,” who has written an advice book/memoir. (11 p.m. Eastern, Comedy Central)“The Colbert Report”: Adm. Michael Mullen, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. (11:31 p.m. Eastern, Comedy Central)“Jimmy Kimmel Live”: Tim Allen; Anna Gunn of the new Fox series “Gracepoint”; and music from the Madden Brothers. (11:35 p.m. Eastern, ABC)TOMORROW• Payday!If you are a resident of Alaska and have lived there for at least one year, you’ll be receiving your $1,884 dividend (via direct deposit) from the Alaska Permanent Fund.The state began distributing the money, which comes from oil royalties, in 1982. The annual checks have totaled about $37,000 since then.Adeel Hassan and Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.Your Evening Briefing is posted at 5 p.m. weekdays.Don’t miss Your Morning Briefing at 6 a.m. weekdays.What would you like to see here? Email us at nytnow@nytimes.com.Follow us on Twitter: @nytnow.