THE GREAT DEBATE Edmund Burke, Thomas Paine, and the Birth of Right and Left By Yuval Levin Basic Books, $27.99. It is traditional to date the political terms “left” and “right” to the French Revolution, from the seating arrangements of the National Assembly. Levin’s novelty is to define those terms by reference to the reactions of two English-­speaking pamphleteers, Thomas Paine and Edmund Burke, who sought to understand that revolution as either an extension of or a contrast to their own countries’ revolutions (of 1776 and 1688). Levin’s purpose is to explicate the deep structure of left-right division within the context of the Anglo-­American political tradition. An important implication is that Paine’s radicalism is fully American, and not a foreign import as many other conservative intellectuals prefer to think. Another, probably not intended by the author, is that Burke’s conservatism is surprisingly foreign. For those unfamiliar with Burke, it’s bracing to encounter his peculiar liberal conservatism. For example, he argued that natural equality, a liberal premise he accepted, implied that hereditary aristocracy was superior to democracy. If all men are created equal, then seeking the most talented individuals for leadership was a fool’s errand; better to choose people raised to govern. Levin, a contributing editor for The Weekly Standard and National Review, wants to identify contemporary progressives with Paine, and the American right as essentially Burkean. But has there ever been a less Burkean politics than that of a conservative party that fetishizes the inflexibility of a written constitution, idealizes Randian individualism and is powered by a culturally leveling populism?THE RIGHT PATH From Ike to Reagan, How Republicans Once Mastered Politics — and Can Again By Joe Scarborough Random House, $26.Was Ronald Reagan actually an Eisenhower Republican? In his breezy but pointed history of the modern Republican Party, Scarborough suggests just that. Detailing the Gipper’s deviations from conservative orthodoxy on foreign policy, taxes, gun control and abortion, he argues that Reagan “rose to power as a Main Street conservative with more in common with Eisenhower and Nixon than people generally recognized.” Fighting words in the contemporary Republican Party. But for Scarborough, a former congressman of Newt Gingrich’s class of 1994 and now the host of “Morning Joe,” they are words of praise. Inasmuch as it is a political brief, “The Right Path” calls for a conservatism that, as William F. Buckley said, “takes into account reality” rather than expecting reality to conform to ideological presuppositions. Those presuppositions Scarborough by and large declines to debate; he assumes conservatives agree on ends, and disagree only on political means. As a consequence, the political brief is less engaging than the book’s history of intraparty fissiparousness. But that history suggests conservatives rarely frame disagreement the way Scarborough would prefer. Notwithstanding his excoriation of conservative talk radio, the activists he describes haven’t changed much from the age of Lindbergh to the age of Limbaugh.THE REVOLT AGAINST THE MASSES How Liberalism Has Undermined the Middle Class By Fred Siegel Encounter, $23.99.Siegel’s book purports to be a work of intellectual genealogy, tracing the history of the pernicious ideology of liberalism from its Germanic, protofascist and generally un-American roots down through the “radical chic” years of the ’60s to the Obama administration’s present, adapting to circumstances but unchanged at its core: a resentment of the middle class, with its traditional morals and indefatigable work ethic. Siegel builds up his picture by collage, quoting here from the progressive Herbert Croly, there from H. L. Mencken. There’s no attempt to wrestle with these writers; the point is to indict them, and “The Revolt Against the Masses” resembles nothing so much as the kind of sweeping left-wing indictment — say, that the American founding was a project of white supremacy — that Siegel would no doubt view as contemptible. It’s not hard to find books of this sort, designed not to educate but to stoke the resentments of conservative readers. What’s startling is that Siegel, an accomplished historian of the American city, wrote one. It’s surprising to hear him casually assuming that global warming is essentially a hoax, or that the Great Depression would have ended much more swiftly had the government taken a hands-off approach. And it’s surprising that Siegel never asks how liberalism came to be “the most successful of the turn-of-the-20th-century vanguard movements.” The way he describes these individuals and ideas, one wonders how they could have elected a dogcatcher, much less any number of presidents.THE BABY BOOM How It Got That Way and It Wasn’t My Fault and I’ll Never Do It Again By P. J. O’Rourke Atlantic Monthly, $25.Now 66 years old, O’Rourke is well into what Dave Van Ronk might have called his “anecdotage.” So it’s appropriate that his most recent book is a gentle trip along well-worn lanes of baby boomer memory. The trip takes us from an idyllic ’50s childhood of coonskin caps and befinned Buicks, through the drug-­addled ’60s down to the present. At its best you can hear the ghost of the radio monologuist Jean Shepherd wheezing his appreciation. At its worst, you can see the ghost of Andy Rooney shaking his head and rolling his eyes. A couple of times you get authentic baby boomer pathos — for example, when O’Rourke’s buddy Jumbo gets shot down and killed in Vietnam, leading to the line that could be O’Rourke’s motto: “You can’t make a joke out of everything. But you can keep trying.” The book peters out sometime in the Nixon administration, zipping rapidly from there to the present in the last couple of chapters, the suggestion being that baby boomers have been trying to relive their glory days ever since. And, in O’Rourke’s view, that’s a good thing: Fat, lazy and stupid may be no way to go through life, but it’s a path unlikely to lead to World War III. Which makes O’Rourke wonder whether his generation, the one that, in Bob Dole’s memorable phrase, “never did anything real,” isn’t the actual Greatest Generation. At least so far.