WASHINGTON —  Senator Patrick J. Leahy said Thursday that next week he would file a new version of a bill aimed at ending the National Security Agency’s bulk phone records collection program after extensive negotiations with the Obama administration and privacy groups.Mr. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, has been leading the negotiations, and several officials familiar with the deliberations said a deal had been reached. Because the Senate leaves for its August recess at the end of next week, it is unlikely to vote on the bill before September.Mr. Leahy’s draft bill is said to make over a dozen changes to a version of the legislation, called the U.S.A. Freedom Act, that the House passed in May. Some privacy advocates who had denounced the House bill as too watered-down said they backed Mr. Leahy’s draft.“The Center for Democracy and Technology supports the draft language we’ve seen,” said Harley Geiger, a senior counsel for the advocacy group. “It is, in every instance, a step forward and an improvement on what the House enacted.”Under both the House bill and Mr. Leahy’s draft, the N.S.A. would no longer systematically collect records of Americans’ phone calls, which would instead stay with the phone companies unless the government made requests for specific sets of them linked to a terrorism suspect.But Mr. Leahy’s version — described by several people who read it — tightens the language in the House version intended to prevent the bulk collection of business records about Americans. The House bill said such record demands must be limited by a “specific selection term.” Privacy groups contended that was too vague and could still allow the government to gather huge amounts of records with one order.Mr. Leahy’s draft says that such a selection term must “narrowly limit the scope of the tangible things sought to the greatest extent reasonably practical” and says it cannot be a term that is “based on a broad geographic region, including a city, state, ZIP code or area code.”His bill makes several changes to provisions allowing for more public reporting about surveillance. Among other things, it would require companies to wait just one year — rather than two in the House bill — before reporting that they had received a Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act order for the first time.The bill also modifies several changes the House version made to the procedures of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, which hears only the government’s point of view without any opposing counsel to argue the other side or to file appeals if the government wins, and issues classified opinions interpreting surveillance laws.The House bill says the government must make public unclassified summaries of significant rulings by the court. Mr. Leahy’s draft adds that those summaries must have enough information for people to understand the rulings’ impact on civil liberties.Critics of the court have called for a public advocate who would have the power to intervene in particular cases and file appeals. The House bill stopped far short of that, instead essentially codifying the court’s ability to appoint a “friend of the court” to make additional arguments if judges were dealing with novel issues.Under Mr. Leahy’s version, those special advocates would be given a specific mandate to advocate “in support of legal interpretations that advance individual privacy and civil liberties.” But it would not give the advocates the power to intervene on their own in a case, or to file appeals if the government prevailed in a request for new surveillance powers.In a column published by the newspaper The Hill on Thursday, Judge James G. Carr of United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio, who served on the surveillance court from 2002 to 2008, argued that Congress should say the special advocates represent surveillance targets, giving them standing to file appeals.Mr. Leahy also does not address a controversy over the government’s practice of searching for Americans’ communications in databases of phone calls and emails that were intercepted without a warrant because the surveillance was directed at noncitizens abroad.Several senators, including Ron Wyden of Oregon and Mark Udall of Colorado, both Democrats, have called for requiring the court’s permission to search for a specific American’s communications, and last month the House separately approved an amendment to a spending bill that would bar the use of funds for such searches. But the Obama administration opposes that change, and Mr. Leahy’s draft does not include it.Mr. Leahy said in a statement that he expected his bill to have “broad support from the privacy community, the technology industry, and across the political spectrum.”Edward Price, a White House spokesman, said the recent negotiations “have yielded significant progress” toward “meaningful reform that both increases transparency and enhances privacy protections while maintaining national security.”