BRUSSELS — Lawmakers on Wednesday approved a new set of commissioners for the European Union’s executive branch, ending months of sometimes acrimonious debate over the administrative direction of the 28-nation bloc.The vote by the European Parliament in Strasbourg, France, enables Jean-Claude Juncker, the former prime minister of Luxembourg, to take over as president of the European Commission on Nov. 1, heading a team of 27 other commissioners. There were 423 votes in favor of the commission, 209 votes against and 67 abstentions.In a speech to the European Parliament before the vote, Mr. Juncker acknowledged that the next five years — the length of the new commission’s term — would be the “last chance” to get citizens of the bloc’s member countries to fully support the concept of European unity.Some of the lawmakers who were elected in May campaigned on a platform of dropping the euro or even leaving the European Union. Others who were voted into office vowed to challenge the powers of European authorities like the commission, which they viewed as overly meddlesome and out of touch with regular citizens.In that spirit, the nomination hearings for the candidates in Mr. Juncker’s commission were unusually contentious. Jonathan Hill, a Briton who was nominated to oversee financial markets, was called back for an unprecedented second hearing before the committee.And for the first time, lawmakers derailed the candidacy of a nominee who was a former prime minister. That candidate, Alenka Bratusek of Slovenia, had been nominated by Mr. Juncker to oversee energy policy. She failed to convince lawmakers that she had the qualifications for the job or that she would be sufficiently tough toward Russia, which is a major supplier of natural gas to Europe.Last week, Mr. Juncker said that Maros Sefcovic of Slovakia was his new nominee to oversee energy policy. Mr. Sefcovic had originally been intended to manage transportation matters, but that role now goes to Violeta Bulc of Slovenia.Each of the European Union’s member countries is allowed one person on the commission.Among its many roles, the commission has the sole right to initiate European legislation and the power to enforce treaties by suing member governments at the Court of Justice of the European Union.Frans Timmermans, a former foreign minister of the Netherlands, becomes first vice president and will serve as Mr. Juncker’s deputy.Federica Mogherini, the Italian foreign minister, becomes the bloc’s foreign policy chief, taking over from Catherine Ashton of Britain.After the vote on Wednesday, Mr. Juncker said it was “time to roll up our sleeves and get down to work: to kick-start economic recovery, create more and better jobs, address the plight of Europe’s youth for a better future, protect the most vulnerable in our society and cope with the rapidly deteriorating geopolitical situation.”The European Union has its origins in the 1950s, after World War II, but it has recently come under strong pressure from populist and anti-European movements, particularly in countries like France and Britain. Those movements, which won record numbers of seats in the Parliament in elections in May, say that institutions like the commission have been ineffective at controlling migration and managing the economy.During the proceedings on Wednesday morning, some lawmakers waved placards opposing austerity, the tough budgetary discipline endorsed by Mr. Juncker’s predecessor, José Manuel Barroso.Austerity measures, which emphasize deficit reduction over stimulus spending, helped prevent debt-ridden countries like Greece and Cyprus from being forced to leave the euro currency union, but also forced many Europeans into economic hardship.Wednesday’s parliamentary session had a helping of hostile statements. Nigel Farage, the head of the U.K. Independence Party, said Britain would no longer be part of the European Union by the end of Mr. Juncker’s term. And Marine Le Pen, the leader of the National Front, a far-right French party, said Mr. Juncker would do too little to protect Europe from the forces of globalization.Philippe Lamberts, a president of the Greens bloc in the Parliament, said his group could not vote in favor of Mr. Juncker’s commission because its platform did not go far enough to “re-establish the trust of our citizens in the nascent European democracy” or to tackle rising inequality.At least one analyst agreed with Mr. Juncker’s statement that the European Union has reached a pivotal moment. “Juncker is right that the next five years are decisive,” Guntram B. Wolff, the director of Bruegel, a research group based in Brussels, said Wednesday. “We have to create jobs to keep the support of citizens for the E.U.”“To convince national policy makers of the need to act,” Mr. Wolff said, Mr. Juncker would need to focus on harnessing financing from institutions like the European Investment Bank and use his diplomatic skills.In scrutinizing the candidacy of Mr. Hill as commissioner for financial regulation, lawmakers expressed concern about the potential for conflicts of interest because of Mr. Hill’s work as a lobbyist for a company with financial services clients.Some also expressed skepticism because Mr. Hill is a close ally of Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain. Mr. Cameron has promised to hold a referendum on whether Britain should remain part of the European Union if he wins the country’s general election next May.