Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Torture fallout.International human rights advocates are calling for the U.S. to prosecute members of George W. Bush’s administration for their participation in the torture of detainees in the wake of 9/11.A report accuses the C.I.A. of misleading the public and rejects the notion that torture was crucial in the intelligence gathering that led to, among other things, the killing of Osama bin Laden.• Climate change accord.Diplomats from 196 countries at the U.N. climate change conference are closing in on a deal to commit every country to cut fossil fuel emissions.A draft agreement would not stop global warming or reduce many of its effects, in part because it allows each country to set its own reduction targets, but does set policy goals.• Spending deal reached.House leaders may act today on a short-term solution to avert a government shutdown if Congress can’t pass the agreement congressional leaders reached Tuesday.The deadline is Thursday. The agreement would fund most of the federal government through the end of the fiscal year.• Closing their umbrellas.The police urged Hong Kong demonstrators to leave today before they clear the area Thursday in what may be the end of the Occupy Hong Kong protests.The pro-democracy rallies once attracted 100,000 demonstrators, but the umbrella-wielding throngs have been reduced to just 100 people.• Not the appeal he wanted.A judge ruled today that prosecutors can appeal Oscar Pistorius’s culpable homicide conviction and instead seek one for murder in an appeal that will go before the South African Supreme Court.• Clash in West Bank.Witnesses said a senior Palestinian official died today after being beaten by an Israeli soldier and hit by a tear-gas canister fired by Israeli troops during a protest in the West Bank.Israeli officials said they were looking into the report, but had no immediate comment.• Preschool at the White House.President Obama hosts a gathering on early education today at the White House, where he will announce the states and communities to receive $750 million in preschool and child care grants.The president and first lady will visit the Anacostia-Bolling military base to deliver holiday gifts for the U.S. Marine Corps Toys for Tots program.• Extreme weather.Northern California is bracing for a powerful storm, potentially the state’s biggest in five years. High winds and flash floods are expected today and Thursday.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks are sharply lower. European indexes are down slightly, while Asian stocks ended widely mixed.The price of crude oil dropped 4 percent to $61.17 a barrel.• JPMorgan Chase could need another $20 billion under a Fed proposal to increase the capital that big banks must have on hand in case of financial duress.• IBM and Apple today introduce 10 mobile apps for businesses from a portfolio that may eventually include more than 100.• Spain and Thailand are the latest countries to order Uber, the ride-sharing service, to cease operations. On Friday, a court in Paris is expected to decide whether to shut down the service in France.NOTEWORTHY• New drug for depression.The club drug Special K, also known as ketamine, is being used as a treatment for depression at places like Yale, Mount Sinai and the National Institute for Mental Health.A study demonstrates the drug’s effectiveness, but critics warn that doctors don’t know enough about it for use outside of clinical trials.• Prize day.The Nobel Peace Prize was awarded today in Oslo to Malala Yousafzai, 17, a Pakistani advocate for girls’ education, and Kailash Satyarthi, an Indian children’s rights advocate. (Earlier, we incorrectly reported that Malala is 16.)The other Nobels are given out in Sweden today, the anniversary of the death of Alfred Nobel, the inventor of dynamite who established the prizes in his will.• “Call Victoria Embankment” just doesn’t have the same ring.Investors from Abu Dhabi are buying Scotland Yard — the building, not the police force — and turning it into apartments.The Metropolitan Police Service is moving to the Victoria Embankment.• Return to sender.A Russian billionaire who bought James D. Watson’s 1962 Nobel Prize medal for $4.8 million at auction plans to return it to Dr. Watson.“A situation in which an outstanding scientist has to sell a medal recognizing his achievements is unacceptable,” said the buyer, Alisher Usmanov.• Ace to the rescue.The Oakland A’s pitcher Jon Lester agreed to a six-year, $155 million contract with the Chicago Cubs.• People of the year.Doctors, nurses and other Ebola fighters got Time magazine’s annual person of the year nod today. Last year’s award went to Pope Francis.BACK STORYFifty years ago was an auspicious time in popular music.In 1964, the Beatles appeared on Billboard’s charts for the first time, the Rolling Stones released their first album, the Supremes had five No. 1 hits and Simon and Garfunkel debuted with “Wednesday Morning, 3 A.M.”The 50-year milestone is significant, because music published during the first half-century of its recording gets another 20 years of copyright protection under changes in European law.So every year since 2012, studios go through their tape vaults to find unpublished music to get it on the market before the deadline.That’s how we came to get outtakes of Bob Dylan, the Beatles and the Beach Boys in recent years.This year, Sony is releasing a limited-edition nine-LP set of 1964 recordings by Mr. Dylan, including a 46-second try at “Mr. Tambourine Man,” which he would not complete until 1965.The Beach Boys released two copyright-extension sets of outtakes last week.There’s no official word on a Beatles release, but last year around this time, “The Beatles Bootleg Recordings 1963” turned up unannounced on iTunes.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.Want to get the briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.