An outspoken Chinese journalist who was jailed after the armed crackdown of 1989 has been detained in Beijing on charges of obtaining and leaking a confidential Communist Party document, a state-run news agency reported on Thursday. The report said the journalist, Gao Yu, had admitted to the crime and was “willing to accept legal punishment.”The announcement of the charges against Ms. Gao has come while the Chinese government seeks to stifle dissent ahead of the 25th anniversary of the suppression of the pro-democracy protests that filled Tiananmen Square in 1989. Ms. Gao has long been forbidden to write for domestic Chinese media, but she has continued to write for overseas websites and publications, including a Chinese-language website of the German news service Deutsche Welle. Her columns there have featured acerbic criticisms of the Communist Party and its leader, Xi Jinping. Ms. Gao disappeared from her home in Beijing late in April. The Beijing police confirmed that she was detained on April 24 and has been under investigation for leaking a secret document from the party’s central leadership, Xinhua, China’s main state news agency, reported on Thursday.“In August 2013, a certain overseas website published in full a secret central document, and subsequently many websites republished it,” said Xinhua, citing the police investigators. “After an investigation, the suspect Gao Yu has confessed the facts of the crime of illegally obtaining the secret central document and providing it to the website.”The police said that Ms. Gao obtained a copy of the document last June and copied it into her computer before sending it abroad. The report did not describe its contents.The report said the police investigation was continuing, and suggested that Ms. Gao may face tougher punishment yet, but did not specify what would happen to her. Xinhua said that Ms. Gao had “expressed profound contrition” and “sincerely and wholeheartedly understood her errors and crimes, and was willing to accept legal punishment.”The announcement of Ms. Gao’s detention has come during a tense time in China, where the government is particularly wary of dissent and protest before the 25th anniversary of the armed clampdown on protests in 1989. After Ms. Gao was taken into custody, the authorities in Beijing also detained several intellectuals and a prominent rights lawyer, Pu Zhiqiang, who had attended a memorial meeting for 1989. Outside experts believe many hundreds of residents were killed in the armed crackdown.In 1993, Ms. Gao was arrested on similar charges of leaking state secrets and was sentenced in 1994 to six years in prison. On Thursday, a news program of China’s main television broadcaster, CCTV, showed police searching Ms. Gao’s home and Ms. Gao, her face slightly obscured by a block on the screen, admitting to the charges.For years, Ms. Gao, who is about 70, has been active among intellectuals and former officials in Beijing critical of the Communist Party’s rigid controls on political life. Human rights advocates voiced dismay at the charges against her.“It’s unclear what document led to her detention,” said Maya Wang, a researcher in Hong Kong for Human Rights Watch. “But the case highlights the dangerously vague Chinese state secrets law, in which the designation of state secrets is broad and ill-defined, and can’t be legally challenged in courts.”