KABUL, Afghanistan —  Afghanistan’s election crisis has twisted through each of the past 10 days, as the presidential candidate Abdullah Abdullah has wielded boycott and brinkmanship in his quest to expose what he calls industrial-scale fraud against him.On Monday, he won his first major concession, when one of the country’s top election officials resigned after repeated accusations by Mr. Abdullah that he was at the heart of a conspiracy to rig the presidential runoff.The official, Ziaulhaq Amarkhil, said in an emotional news conference here that he was stepping down “for the sake of the country and for national unity.” But he maintained that he was innocent. And he criticized Mr. Abdullah’s release of audio recordings that the candidate has offered as evidence that Mr. Amarkhil was directing widespread ballot-box stuffing, saying the tapes had been faked.The tapes, whose authenticity could not be verified, are a compendium of conversations between a man said to be Mr. Amarkhil and an array of subordinates, as well as people said to be campaign staff members for the other presidential candidate, Ashraf Ghani. The recordings, which the Abdullah campaign made available to reporters, include the voices of men chuckling about “stuffing the sheep,” which the Abdullah campaign says is code for stuffing ballot boxes.Mr. Abdullah, who essentially walked away from the entire electoral process last week in protest, applauded the move. He said it offered an opportunity to re-engage with the Independent Election Commission.“The door is now open to talk to the commission,” Mr. Abdullah said at a news conference. “Our attitude will be responsible in the coming days and weeks. But it will be in support of the people’s rights.”Mr. Ghani’s campaign said it would accept Mr. Amarkhil’s resignation, though the candidate’s aides had aired concerns that such a move would be bad for Afghan democracy.“We respect the decision of Mr. Amarkhil to resign for the sake of the election and for the sake of the unity of the Afghan people,” said Abbas Noyan, a spokesman for Mr. Ghani.The resignation was the latest display of electoral theater to grip the nation since the June 14 runoff election, held to determine the successor to President Hamid Karzai. Since then, Mr. Abdullah has accused Mr. Ghani, the election commission and Mr. Karzai himself of colluding to steal a victory his campaign felt was assured.Mr. Amarkhil’s resignation was but one of Mr. Abdullah’s demands after the runoff, and the candidate said he would probably outline his other requirements for the election commission soon. But it was still unclear what could break the current deadlock.Among Mr. Abdullah’s chief concerns is the estimated turnout of about 7.5 million voters, which trumps what was considered high turnout from the first round.Mr. Abdullah said the runoff figure was far too high to be genuine, and that ballot stuffing in largely pro-Ghani areas was partly to blame. As it stands, both campaigns figure that in the current tabulation Mr. Ghani is winning, a reversal of the first round when Mr. Abdullah was ahead by a 13-point margin.Mr. Abdullah has in particular complained about voting in southeastern Afghanistan, where some provinces saw voter turnout double or triple from the first round. While there is evidence to suggest that ethnic Pashtuns, who share Mr. Ghani’s ethnicity, turned out in greater numbers for the runoff vote, Mr. Abdullah’s camp has cried foul.On Monday, the election commission said it would conduct a partial recount of five provinces, accounting for roughly 10 percent of the overall vote, where Mr. Abdullah has the most concerns.“The inspection will take place in front of the national and international observers and Independent Election Commission,” said Ahmad Yousuf Nuristani, the head of the commission.The United Nations, at the behest of Mr. Karzai and Mr. Abdullah, has agreed to involve itself in the process. On Monday, the body reiterated its call for Mr. Abdullah to rejoin the political process and allow it to proceed as scheduled.“Following the resignation, the mission calls on the presidential candidates to fully re-enter the electoral process, cooperate with the electoral institutions and respect their decisions,” the United Nations statement said.