The violinist Anne-Sophie Mutter was with the Berlin Philharmonic last year, recording Dvorak’s Violin Concerto for the first time. After three days of work, the results were very good. But Ms. Mutter thought they could be even better.There were just 40 minutes left in the final session in the studio; the Dvorak concerto is 34. Ms. Mutter told the players they had one last run to give their all. The conductor, Manfred Honeck, gave the downbeat.“And this is basically the take on which the entire CD is based,” Ms. Mutter recalled by phone recently. “This orchestra is able and willing to throw themselves into the music in a way which I have almost no words to describe to you.”This at-the-buzzer Dvorak push is just one example of the visceral intensity that many argue sets the Berlin Philharmonic apart in the impossible, irresistible game of Who’s Best. Asked to compare it with other storied ensembles — the Vienna Philharmonic, the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra in Amsterdam, the great American orchestras — Ms. Mutter gave the standard demurral: It’s like comparing apples and oranges. But, she continued, Berlin “is the apple — the mother of all apples.”The mother of all apples arrives in the Big Apple in a big way this week. On Wednesday the orchestra opens Carnegie Hall’s season with Ms. Mutter, playing Bruch’s Violin Concerto No. 1, with its music director, Simon Rattle, conducting. Mr. Rattle’s announcement last year that he would leave his position, arguably the most prestigious of its kind, when his contract expires in 2018, has set off heated speculation about who will follow him.After four concerts at Carnegie, including a cycle of Schumann’s four symphonies and Georg Friedrich Haas’s seething “dark dreams” (2014), the Berliners travel uptown to the Park Avenue Armory. There they will kick off Lincoln Center’s White Light Festival with two performances of Peter Sellars’s spare, powerful staging of Bach’s “St. Matthew Passion,” joined by the Berlin Radio Choir, a superb cast of soloists and an immersive seating-in-the-round arrangement designed to mimic the orchestra’s celebrated hall in Berlin, the Philharmonie.This wide-ranging, multimillion-dollar weeklong residency is a rare collaboration between Carnegie Hall and Lincoln Center, which generally try to keep out of each other’s way. That the two institutions have come together is a tribute to an orchestra that, perhaps more than any other, has balanced careful custody of its deep traditions with innovation — including, in its Digital Concert Hall, unveiled in 2008, one of classical music’s most sophisticated Internet streaming platforms. “I can’t imagine doing this with the Vienna Philharmonic or the Concertgebouw,” Jane Moss, Lincoln Center’s artistic director, said in a phone interview.Since becoming music director in 2002, Mr. Rattle, 59, has tended to the Austro-German standards even as he has expanded the ensemble’s repertory and developed its stylistic range to more fully encompass both the contemporary and the Baroque. The latest in a line of distinguished leaders that has included Hans von Bülow, Wilhelm Furtwängler, Herbert von Karajan and Claudio Abbado, he has also broadened the institution’s education and outreach efforts and advocated for creative, risky partnerships like Mr. Sellars’s Bach stagings, sometimes despite resistance from his orchestra.“I try not to allow them to get as conservative as they would like,” Mr. Rattle said in February in his dressing room at the Philharmonie. “They begged me basically for two years not to do it,” he added of the “St. Matthew Passion” staging, which had its premiere in 2010. “As it got closer, they begged me louder and louder. And when it was extraordinary, I think everyone felt, ‘Oh, actually, it was our idea.’ I like it when they think it was their idea, because it means that it worked.”The Philharmonic today is in many ways a different orchestra than in its glamorous 1960s and ’70s heyday. During Karajan’s 35-year tenure, which ended just before his death in 1989, he buffed the ensemble’s sound to a cultivated sheen that could focus to fearsome concentration. Ms. Mutter, who made her professional debut with the orchestra in 1977, recalled a performance of Bruckner’s Seventh Symphony in which the slow second movement was so intense that she had to leave the hall.Under Abbado, who died in January, the orchestra’s playing became more intimate, agile and variegated, and contemporary music entered its regular diet. Mr. Rattle continued that transformation of the ensemble into what Manuel Brug, a music critic at the newspaper Die Welt, in a recent phone interview called “a luxury chameleon,” capable of anything.After appearing with the orchestra throughout the 1970s and ’80s, the conductor Riccardo Muti hadn’t led it again until a few years ago. “It was even more flexible than before,” he said in a phone interview, recalling his return. “If you wanted that dark sound — the contrabassi, the celli, the strings in general — you could recreate, in a way, the old sound. But if you wanted something more modern, more contemporary, more sophisticated, you could also get it very easily.”Certain critics have found Mr. Rattle’s interpretations of the 19th-century classics mannered and uninspiring. While these snipes have softened in recent years, there was some support for that position in a February performance at the Philharmonie of Brahms’s Third Symphony, full of abrupt, willful shifts of tempo.But later in that concert, Mr. Rattle drew an uncannily vocal, choral quality from the strings in the exhalations near the end of Debussy’s “La Mer,” and Mr. Haas’s “dark dreams” unfolded with lavish fury. The Bach “Passion” stagings have shown off the best qualities of both him and the players, combining scrupulous style, individual virtuosity and theatrical momentum.Beyond artistic matters, the Rattle years have been a time of self-examination and structural transformation. Over the past decade, a fuller accounting has been made of the ensemble’s activities during the Nazi period, when it was known as the Reichsorchester and was under the control of Joseph Goebbels’s propaganda ministry.As Mr. Rattle took over in 2002, the orchestra transitioned to a new organizational model that allowed it more leeway in using the money it made. In 2011, seeking a more stable financial situation, it moved after decades as the resident ensemble of the Salzburg Easter Festival in Austria, which Karajan founded in 1967, to a festival in Baden-Baden, Germany. Stung by the collapsing classical recording industry, the orchestra founded an in-house label this year.It has been a busy, satisfying stretch. And a substantial one: Mr. Rattle’s tenure will be shorter than Karajan’s, of course, but longer than Abbado’s when he leaves, after 16 years, in 2018. (Will he then, as has been rumored, take a position with the London Symphony Orchestra or the Lucerne Festival in Switzerland? “Discussions go on,” he said.) The orchestra plans to elect his successor this spring.Elect? Americans, used to symphonies governed by administrators, may be surprised to learn that the Berlin Philharmonic has been, since its founding in 1882, something akin to a self-run radical democracy, with an egalitarian and transparent pay structure. The orchestra was formed as a rebellion against an authoritarian conductor, and new players are still accepted and music directors chosen by votes of the membership.Mr. Rattle’s successor “must be a great musician, with big charisma,” Peter Riegelbauer, a bassist in the orchestra since 1981 and one of its chairmen, said in his office at the Philharmonie. “That’s always so important, that thing you can’t explain. That mystical thing that we had with former chief conductors.”Unlike some orchestras, this one favors conductors it knows well, not options out of left field. Andris Nelsons, for example, had never publicly conducted the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra in England when he was named its music director in 2007. Something like that will not happen in Berlin, where Mr. Nelsons is thought to be a serious contender.He appeared to be bowing out last month in an article by Mr. Brug of Die Welt, which quoted Mr. Nelsons, 35, as saying that accepting the directorship of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, a position that officially started on Saturday, was a “strategic decision and also a signal” that in 2018 he would still be too young for Berlin. But in a subsequent interview published in The New York Times and by phone last week, he insisted that he had been misquoted and that his Boston appointment was “no signal to Berlin or any other orchestra.”Other galvanizing stars around his age might also appeal, like Gustavo Dudamel, Yannick Nézet-Séguin or Kirill Petrenko. Christian Thielemann, 55, would be a tradition-minded throwback to his early mentor, Karajan; he is brilliant in the standard repertory but lacks clear vision elsewhere.It’s also possible that the orchestra will punt, appointing a veteran conductor like Daniel Barenboim (who is believed to have been favored by some players in the process that elected Mr. Rattle), Mariss Jansons or Riccardo Chailly for a relatively brief contract — say, five years, as opposed to Mr. Rattle’s initial 10 — to give the players more time to get to know the younger generation.Whoever gets the position will inherit an orchestra that, with the Digital Concert Hall, has tried as hard as any to adapt to a changing technological landscape. Karajan was a visionary in this regard, planning the Philharmonie, which opened in 1963, with holes for cameras in its seating tiers, but the lucrative recording contracts he attracted are now things of the past.The Digital Hall, featuring both live and recent programs as well as a growing archive of classic performances, has about 450,000 registered users and, among them, 20,000 customers who pay about $13 for a week’s access up to just under $200 for a year. Though buoyed by investments from Deutsche Bank and Sony, the project is not yet financially self-sustaining.“Our policy has never been to throw out a lot of free content,” Stanley Dodds, a Philharmonic violinist since 1994 and one of its media chairmen, said. “We think people are willing to pay.”But, he admitted, “everyone’s making it up as they go along, a little bit.”New Sibelius and Beethoven cycles are among the orchestra’s coming recording plans, along with releases of older material. Next season at the Philharmonie. Mr. Sellars will direct a semi-staged production of Debussy’s “Pelléas et Mélisande,” with which Mr. Rattle made a belated Metropolitan Opera debut in 2010. (He is to return to the Met in the fall of 2016 for a new production of Wagner’s “Tristan und Isolde.”)“Even if they were just tuning, every note counted,” Ms. Mutter recalled of her experiences with the Berliners. As orchestras grow ever more international, the idiosyncratic sound worlds that once defined them are blending increasingly into one. What now separate the excellent from the extraordinary are creativity and commitment.“There isn’t a feeling of routine,” said Mr. Rattle of his orchestra. “People come to the concert and it’s like the end of the world. In this moment, there is nothing more important.”