KUWAIT CITY —  Moving to grind out political dissent at home while the world’s attention is focused on fighting militant extremists in Iraq and Syria, the government of Kuwait is increasingly wielding a penalty that was once rare here: revoking citizenship.The severity of the punishment, imposed for offenses that sometimes amount to little more than disagreeing with the government, has stoked bitterness and raised an unaccustomed fear that new lines are being drawn between loyalty and treason.Kuwait, where citizens have elected full-throated Parliaments for decades and lawmakers have publicly criticized official corruption, has been the most politically open of the conservative Persian Gulf monarchies.But as tensions in the country have been growing, analysts said, the revocations have raised concerns that Kuwait is also taking cues from some of its more repressive neighbors in the region, including some that have won praise from the United States for joining the military campaign against the Islamic State.“They are sending a message,” said Sulaiman al-Jassem, a Kuwaiti human rights activist who is one of many people here facing criminal charges for what the activists say are essentially political acts, like attending protests. “There are no limits,” he said.According to the state news agency, Kuwait’s government has revoked the citizenship of more than two dozen people in the past three months, including 18 on Monday.Ahmed Jabr al-Shammari, one of those whose citizenship was revoked, ran a television channel and newspapers that gave space to opposition figures and antigovernment points of view. The government, after suspending his media outlets, eventually shut them down in July and took away Mr. Shammari’s citizenship — leaving him essentially “stateless,” he said.The gulf monarchs saw new threats to their power emerge after the popular uprisings across the Arab world in 2011, and they have used a set of similar tools to beat back challenges. Human rights workers have watched with alarm as the governments have issued or threatened to issue new laws to contain dissidents, including arresting them for public gatherings, speeches or social media postings — and increasingly stripping them of citizenship.Though there has been a spurt recently, the practice has been growing for several years. In 2011, the United Arab Emirates took passports from Islamist activists who had been naturalized citizens; a lawyer for the men said it was because they had demanded political change.Bahrain stripped  31 dissidents of their citizenship in 2012, including former members of Parliament and exiled political activists. Most recently, a court in Bahrain revoked the citizenship of nine men on Monday who the authorities said were trying to smuggle weapons into the country. (The court also sentenced the men to life in prison.)Claire Beaugrand, a specialist in Persian Gulf affairs at the French Institute for the Near East, said the crackdown was reversing movement in the past decade toward greater openness in some of the gulf states, including Bahrain.“Now the trend is counterrevolution, and they are dismantling liberal measures they had taken before,” Ms. Beaugrand said, adding that the repression often came shrouded in official discourse about fidelity to the state — “who is loyal and who is not.”Few places had as much to lose as Kuwait, which was long seen as resistant to the region’s political torpor. Opposition groups here led to the removal of the prime minister in 2011, and political activists and lawmakers more recently have urged the government to reject a regional security pact, fearing that it would undermine the country’s relative freedoms.“In Kuwait,” Ms. Beaugrand said, “people are aware that they have rights and more freedoms than other gulf states.”The strict measures, though, also reflected a growing acrimony in Kuwait’s political debates. As a diverse but fractured opposition movement has made bolder demands of the government — as well as statements viewed by officials as provocative — the authorities have appeared more determined to stifle any complaints.Belkis Wille, a Kuwait researcher for Human Rights Watch, said the severity of the measures taken against government opponents had steadily increased over the past few years. “Now we’re seeing this dramatic new step of citizenship revocation,” she said.Losing citizenship cuts a Kuwaiti off from the oil-rich country’s generous system of state benefits, including health care, housing and education — what Mr. Jassem, the democracy activist, called the “golden lottery ticket.” In some ways, those who have had their citizenship revoked are placed among more than 100,000 Kuwaiti residents who have been denied citizenship, despite being in the country for generations in many cases.Musallam al-Barrak, a prominent opposition figure and frequent guest on Mr. Shammari’s television channel, compared the revoking of citizenship to a “civil execution” and called it a desperate measure by the government. “It indicates their weakness,” he said, “not their strength.”To explain the revocations, the authorities have cited provisions of the 1959 citizenship law in Kuwait, which permits the government to revoke citizenship, including when naturalized citizens have committed crimes or obtained citizenship through fraud. Calls seeking comment from a spokesman for the cabinet, which issued the revocations, were not returned.Abdullah al-Barghash, a former opposition member of the Kuwaiti Parliament, was stripped of his citizenship in July. In August the cabinet revoked the citizenship of an ultraconservative religious cleric, Nabil al-Awady. The group revoked on Monday also included Saad al-Ajmi, an opposition spokesman.Even those who saw legitimate reasons for some revocations said Mr. Shammari’s case set a chilling precedent. He not only was Kuwaiti-born, they said, but also was charged under a law that allows the authorities to revoke the citizenship of people seeking to “undermine the economic or social system of the country.”Mr. Shammari also appeared to have been swept up in a palace drama, aligned with one party in a royal power struggle that has upended Kuwait’s politics and exposed fissures within the ruling Sabah family. The feud broke into the open late last year when rumors circulated about secret recordings that were said to reveal a conspiracy to overthrow the government.The controversy, which was discussed on social media as well as on Mr. Shammari’s television channel, so unnerved the government that it issued an order banning discussion of the recordings.In a recent interview in his office, where he was signing severance checks for hundreds of employees who were ordered by the government to find other work, Mr. Shammari said he would challenge the cabinet’s decision in the courts.He said he had little to worry about personally — his publishing and real estate interests have made him wealthy, and his white Rolls-Royce was parked downstairs — although the loss of citizenship seemed to exclude him from politics. He was more concerned about his four children, who by Kuwaiti law derive their citizenship from their father. “There is no role for people who lose their nationality,” he said.A Kuwaiti court declined last week to rule on his case, saying it was outside its jurisdiction.