MIAMI —  There was a time not all that long ago that Santiago Alvarez, a Miami developer, fantasized about swinging an automatic weapon over his shoulder and heading back to Cuba to incite an uprising.His criminal record shows he did a bit more than daydream.A 30-month federal prison stint for illegally possessing a cache of weapons behind him, the 72-year-old Mr. Alvarez is among a small group of older Cuban exile activists who the Castro government believes are still plotting its demise. He and six other Miami men were accused by Cuban officials Wednesday of plotting a violent attack on military installations in Cuba with the hopes of toppling the Communist government.Mr. Alvarez denies any involvement in the alleged plot. Some others here raised questions about how much the case is about crime and how much is about politics. Four of the men are in custody in Havana in connection with an episode that to Mr. Alvarez and others has the feel of something more from the past than the present.“I wish I could get a rifle and fight the dictatorship, but that is not realistic,” he said on Thursday. “We cannot live in the past.”Fifty-five years after Fidel Castro won an armed rebellion of his own and a week after Washington again kept Cuba on its short list of state sponsors of terrorism, the Cuban government publicly announced that violent plots persist.Cuba-watchers said the case was hard to separate from political theater, particularly because the announcement came on the heels of a visit by four members of Congress to see Alan Gross, an American imprisoned for illegally taking satellite gear to Cuba. With his case on the diplomatic forefront and Cuba still pushing for the release of three Cuban agents jailed in the United States, experts say Havana is likely to use the latest arrests for its diplomatic benefit.Although Miami was long the birthplace of conspiracies to overthrow the Castros, experts say most aging exiles have embraced nonviolent avenues toward democracy.“I just don’t see it,” said Andy S. Gomez, a Cuba expert, who retired last year from the University of Miami and who voiced skepticism about the charges. “There are some old-timers that believe the only way to topple the regime is by doing these activities, but over the years those numbers have decreased to really nothing.”A statement from the Interior Ministry published in the Communist Party newspaper Granma on Wednesday said that on April 26 four Miami residents “of Cuban origin” were arrested on terrorism-related charges. The men, whom the statement identified as José Ortega Amador, Obdulio Rodríguez González, Raibel Pacheco Santos and Félix Monzón Álvarez, reportedly admitted that they had planned to attack military installations and “promote violent actions.”The men sought to break into a military unit and kill soldiers and officers, according to Juventud Rebelde, another state-run newspaper.“Toward this end, three of the individuals had made several trips to the island, since mid-2013, to study and practice the execution of their plans,” the statement from the Interior Ministry said.The suspects in custody said Santiago Alvarez and two other men in their 70s had helped hatch the plan, the government statement reported. Also implicated were Dr. Manuel Alzugaray, an orthopedist who runs an international medical humanitarian organization in Miami, and Osvaldo Mitat, Mr. Alvarez’s co-defendant in a 2006 weapons-possession case.“Osvaldo and I meet every once and a while and drink coffee, but there has been no conspiracy going on between us for years,” Mr. Alvarez said, adding that he had never met the men arrested in Havana. “Some people are saying these guys are infiltrators. To me, these people are real. I think they either got misguided or wrong advice or they came up with the wrong idea.”Little is known about the men who were arrested.Florida corporate records show that in 2009, Mr. Pacheco, 31, founded an organization called the Cuban Liberation Force.“The purpose of this corporation, under the Human Rights Act, is to help the people in Cuba to reconquer their democracy and lost liberties,” the founders wrote by hand in the state records.Attempts to reach their families were unsuccessful. The State Department declined to comment.“I don’t know these people,” Dr. Alzugaray said. “The Cuban government writes something in a controlled Communist fashion, and it resonates around the world. They have done tremendous propaganda here.”Dr. Alzugaray is the founder of the Miami Medical Team, an organization that provides medical assistance internationally. In the 1980s, the group went to Nicaragua to help those wounded fighting the leftist Sandinista government.The Cuban government has accused Mr. Alvarez of terrorist activities before. Mr. Alvarez is known as a benefactor of Luis Posada Carriles, a former C.I.A. operative linked to both the downing of a Venezuelan airliner and a string of hotel bombings in Havana in the 1990s.Mr. Posada was arrested in Panama 14 years ago on allegations that he planned to assassinate Fidel Castro at a presidential summit meeting, and the Cuban government said at the time that Mr. Alvarez was a mastermind of the operation.The Cuban government later released recordings of him talking to an informant discussing placing a bomb in the famed Tropicana nightclub. In 2005, federal agents raided an apartment of his and found five machine guns and a grenade launcher.Mr. Alvarez said the weapons were C.I.A. relics, but were not going to be used in the plots he had hatched with senior Cuban military officers who planned to conspire against the government.