WASHINGTON — The Obama administration has watched cautiously from the sidelines in the months leading up to Saturday’s elections in Afghanistan, focusing instead on new crises in the Middle East and Ukraine, and no longer on the country that was a foreign policy priority when President Obama first entered office.Current and former administration officials, however, say that ensuring a stable Afghanistan remains important, not just to validate the 1,800 American lives lost and billions of dollars spent over the past 13 years, but to avoid complicating the United States’ larger strategic interests in the region: a stable nuclear-armed Pakistan, improved relations between Pakistan and India, and responding to the growing fear among Central Asian nations about an emboldened Russia.Though the White House has been exhausted by its acrimonious jousting with President Hamid Karzai, it remains open to rekindling a relationship with the government of his successor.“Our engagement with the Afghan government has turned out very badly, and our assumptions about Karzai, going back to the Bush administration, have turned out to be wrong,” said Vali Nasr, dean of the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies and a former Obama administration official. “The challenge now is how to manage Afghanistan in a way that it does not become an immediate security problem at a time when the administration has a lot of other things on its plate.”The Pentagon said this week that there were no deaths in March among the 33,500 American troops still in Afghanistan, the first month without an American fatality there since January 2007. The continuing violence in the country, however, was underscored Friday when an Associated Press photographer was killed and a reporter for the wire service was seriously wounded by a police officer. Election days, an American official said, tend to be among the most violent days in Afghanistan.For months, American officials have steered clear of displays of support for any candidate or any other involvement in the vote. When reports in December about a United States-financed poll raised questions about meddling, the administration cut off funding for all polls, a senior administration official said. The official noted that pro-democracy groups continued to finance polling, so Afghan voters were still getting a sense of the direction of the campaign.“We’re taking the back seat,” said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations. “We’re trying to give the space for the Afghans to hold these elections with no interference from Washington.”Nevertheless, the administration still has a deep interest in an election that is fair and peaceful, in contrast to the vote in 2009, which was marred by widespread fraud. “It could mark Afghanistan’s first democratic transition of power, and we all have a stake in seeing that milestone achieved,” Secretary of State John Kerry said this week.A bigger challenge could come if, as expected, no candidate gets more than 50 percent of the vote, forcing a runoff that could delay the installation of a new president for several months. It further remains to be seen how much influence Mr. Karzai will wield on the political landscape after he leaves the presidency.“There’s an opportunity now with the changing of presidents to re-establish more productive relations on both parts,” said Senator Jack Reed, a Rhode Island Democrat on the Armed Services Committee, who has visited Afghanistan 14 times.The top priority for the administration once Mr. Karzai’s successor is selected is to sign a security deal that would allow American troops to stay past 2014. The leading candidates for president — former Foreign Minister Abdullah Abdullah, former Foreign Minister Zalmay Rassoul, and Ashraf Ghani, a former official at the World Bank — have all promised to sign the deal if elected.Until now, the debate here and in Kabul about the size and duration of an American-led allied force in Afghanistan after 2014 had focused on that country’s long-term security. But allied troop levels in Afghanistan also directly affect long-term American security interests in neighboring Pakistan, according to administration, military and intelligence officials.The risk that Mr. Obama may be forced to pull all American troops out of Afghanistan by the end of the year if no agreement is reached has set off concerns inside American intelligence agencies that they could lose air bases used for drone strikes against Al Qaeda in Pakistan and for responding to a potential nuclear crisis in the region.“One of our major interests there, apart from peace and stability in Afghanistan, of course, is the continued ability to, if need be, surveil and conduct counterterrorism operations,” James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national intelligence, told Congress in February.In congressional testimony last month, Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the international military commander in Afghanistan, said that Al Qaeda would regroup and stage another attack on the West if international troops completely withdrew from the country at the end of this year.General Dunford said that as long as a new Afghan president was in place by August, he was confident that a new security agreement would be signed allowing American and international troops to leave a residual force. Waiting longer than that increases risk, he said.“As you get towards September, you enter a period of high risk simply because of how much work has to be done to redeploy a force and how many days you have left to do it,” General Dunford said.General Dunford told lawmakers that if Afghanistan signed a new security agreement with the United States, he would feel comfortable with an international force of 8,000 to 12,000 troops. Those troops would train, advise and assist Afghan forces. About two-thirds of those troops would come from the United States. Several thousand more American troops would conduct counterterrorism missions, he said.Administration officials insist that Afghanistan is still a focus. “It’s a still priority,” the senior official said, “but there are a number of issues being worked in tandem.”But Ronald E. Neumann, who served as United States ambassador to Afghanistan from 2005 to 2007, warned that without more sustained leadership from the White House, and continued financial aid to Afghanistan from Congress, the country could quickly undermine Mr. Obama’s other foreign policy priorities.“If Afghanistan slides back into chaos, it could lead to years of civil war, drawing in foreign powers,” Mr. Neumann said. “It would be a running sore just like Syria.”