Welcome to NYT Now, the new app from The New York Times. (Download us for iPhone.)Here’s what you need to know:• The politics surrounding a prisoner.The G.O.P. has assailed the Obama administration for releasing five Taliban detainees in exchange for Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, the last American prisoner of war in Afghanistan.“Republicans see the Bergdahl case as just another example of a White House willing to skirt laws it finds inconvenient,” says Carl Hulse, our chief Washington correspondent.“It reinforces their narrative that the president has made similar unilateral decisions on health care policy and now power plant emissions.”But he says the campaign may backfire.Republicans could, he said, “be perceived as overly partisan and meanspirited by second-guessing the White House over its judgment on fast-moving prisoner negotiations.”• It takes more than software to get healthy. Along with new system software for computers and mobile devices, Apple showed off its new Health app today at its annual developers’ conference.Some speculate that the app is a prelude to an Apple fitness device or smartwatch this year, but the company isn’t saying.In any case, having an app that tracks fitness doesn’t necessarily mean people will get more fit.“The whole idea is that people will respond to nudges to modify their behavior if they get real-time information on their exercise and eating behavior,” says our technology reporter Steve Lohr.“The analogy used is finance,” he says.“O.K., but people have a lot of financial information, and they still put far too little, on average, in their 401(k)'s and the like.”• Making change can make money.It’s not just environmental and liberal groups that support moves on climate change, including the measures against coal pollution that President Obama announced today.Both Wall Street and Silicon Valley are also urging action.It’s largely because they see business opportunities, says our environmental reporter Justin Gillis.“Wall Street sees a chance to make money from recapitalizing the American energy system,” he tells us.“Silicon Valley is more complicated,” he says. “It’s a bunch of techy, science-oriented people who follow climate science themselves.”They feel the information technology revolution has a lot to contribute, Mr. Gillis says, and they talk of a smart grid and smarter appliances.“So they see a business element, but they also have the element that they really care about it.”• Remembering better times in Spain.In recent years, King Juan Carlos has appeared frail and out of touch, his reign tarnished by scandal and public relations blunders.But the king, who announced today that he would abdicate, has a bigger legacy, says Raphael Minder, our correspondent in Madrid.“For Spaniards,” he says, “whatever the scandals and whatever has been happening over the past two years isn’t going to wash away the more than 30 years of solid service the king did for Spain.”Older Spaniards especially recall his influence in promoting a peaceful transition at the end of Francisco Franco’s dictatorship in 1975.“The Spaniards from that generation look at the king as someone who’s a cornerstone of the country’s return to democracy,” Mr. Minder says.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks were mixed. The S.&P. 500 gained 0.1 percent.TONIGHT• A gruff lawman who’s missing a little buzz.The Wyoming sheriff Walt Longmire continues to struggle to come to grips with his wife’s death and find her killer as the third season of “Longmire” begins (10 p.m. Eastern on A&E).“ ‘Longmire’ has had fine acting and intricate writing right from its first episode in June 2012,” writes our critic Neil Genzlinger, “but it has settled in as a taken-for-granted steady performer rather than a show that electrifies social media and awards panels.”• A new low for high society?In the fashion of “Real Housewives,” “Ladies of London” will follow the lives of the city’s elite socialites and American expats (10 p.m. Eastern, Bravo).• If you’re staying up...On “The Daily Show”: Robert De Niro (11 p.m. Eastern, Comedy Central).“Colbert Report”: The French economist Thomas Piketty, author of “Capitalism in the Twenty-First Century” (11:30 p.m. Eastern, Comedy Central).“The Tonight Show”: Ricky Gervais, the actor Ansel Elgort and the country music artist Miranda Lambert (11:35 p.m. Eastern, NBC).TOMORROW• Summer’s Super Tuesday.Senator Thad Cochran of Mississippi, seeking a seventh six-year term, and State Senator Chris McDaniel, who’s backed by Tea Party groups, face each other in a mudslinging Republican primary.Mississippi is one of eight states — Alabama, California, Iowa, Montana, New Jersey, New Mexico and South Dakota are the others — that will nominate candidates for the Nov. 4 elections.Adeel Hassan, Victoria Shannon and Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.Your Evening Briefing is posted at 5 p.m. weekdays.Don’t miss Your Morning Briefing at 6 a.m. weekdays.What would you like to see here? Email us at NYTNow@NYTimes.com.Follow us on Twitter: @NYTNow.