DONETSK, Ukraine —  Red Communist flags flew on Sunday in front of a massive bust of Lenin in this hardscrabble coal-mining city, a stronghold of pro-Russia sentiment in Ukraine. About 500 yards away, a few hundred pro-democracy activists, harangued by hundreds of counterdemonstrators, laid wreaths for the victims of last week’s bedlam in Kiev at a memorial to one of Ukraine’s most revered figures, the 19th-century poet Taras Shevchenko.The two gatherings illustrated the diverse forces tugging at Ukraine, especially now that President Viktor F. Yanukovych has disappeared and the legitimacy of what follows is shrouded in doubt.Mr. Yanukovych hails from the mean streets of Donetsk, where in his youth he was twice imprisoned for assault. But he was out of public view on Sunday, a day after a senior aide in Ukraine’s border protection force, Sergei Astakhov, announced that a chartered plane had been prevented from taking off from Donetsk Airport and that Mr. Yanukovych had been seen leaving the plane and driving off in an armored vehicle.Rumors that the president — who fled Kiev, the capital, overnight from Friday into Saturday — was in a local dacha on Sunday appeared to be untrue, said Oleksiy Matsuka, editor in chief of the newspaper Donetskiye Novosti.Mr. Yanukovych has long relied on support from eastern Ukraine, but the situation in the country has turned so suddenly, particularly with the killing of dozens of Ukrainians by their own security forces last week, that it seems unlikely that he could count on it now. Over the weekend, the army and security forces appeared to stand down as the Defense Ministry announced that the military would “not be involved in any political conflict.”Influential politicians were also turning away from Mr. Yanukovych. The leader of his party’s faction in Parliament denounced his political mistakes, and the mayor of Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second largest city, said his presidency was already history, according to the Interfax news agency.A senior member of the president’s party from Donetsk broke publicly with Mr. Yanukovych, while Donetsk’s mayor, an ally of Mr. Yanukovych who had railed against what he called “fascists” and even “Nazis” battling the riot police in Kiev’s Independence Square, put on his own, very Eastern European display of strength.The Shevchenko memorial in Donetsk resonates with both sides in the current conflict: It honors a poet who is credited with giving Ukraine its literary language and thus, in large measure, its identity. Mayor Alexander Lukyanchenko, trying to portray himself as a benign city father, plunged into the crowd at the memorial to shake hands, reassuring a man who had been waiting years for a new apartment that the country’s problems would be solved and warning against a breakup of Ukraine in the pattern of Yugoslavia in the 1990s.It was the final act in an elaborate, two-hour drama carefully managed by the police.Earlier, activists at the wreath-laying ceremony emphasized in a statement that they would neither storm administrative offices, as protesters did in Kiev, nor tear down memorials, as protesters have done with 16 statues of Lenin across the central and eastern parts of the country in recent days, according to the Ukrainian news media. About 300 people turned out for the ceremony at noon.Just an hour later, the second scene unfolded. Hundreds of loud citizens — mostly young men, many of them masked and carrying wooden or metal clubs — gathered on a sidewalk, separated from the memorial crowd by various police units, including black-clad riot units and militia in navy uniforms. The crowd chanted “glory,” not to honor the protesters in Kiev but to praise the Berkut, the elite police units widely held responsible for the violence against the demonstrators.Eventually, the police maneuvered between the two sides, escorting away a few remaining pro-democracy protesters — for their protection, it was said — and corralling, but not arresting, some clearly inebriated men who had been shouting at the protesters while other demonstrators ran down the street to “protect” the Lenin monument.Vsevolod Volosnoi, a doctor watching the scene with his wife, Svetlana, a nurse, mirrored the general confusion that clouds so much of Ukraine’s politics.On the one hand, Mr. Volosnoi, 53, assured a reporter, “We want to live in a civilized place, with the leaders of the democratic movement of all the world.” But, he added, “Not all that came from Kiev is the voice of the people.” And for sure, he said, in this heavily Russian-speaking region adjoining Russia, the people cannot be deprived of their own language.That was an allusion to a measure already approved by Parliament in Kiev to cancel the official status of the Russian language in Ukraine.Leonid Slutsky, chairman of the Russian parliamentary committee that deals with former Soviet lands, told Interfax, “They are trying in every possible way to tear Ukraine away from Russia.” He counseled caution — for now.Moves to deprive various people of their language over centuries of shifting governments in Eastern Europe have always set off fierce disputes, as in the Balkans in the 1990s.In a sign that Ukraine’s political turbulence is even dividing families, a well-dressed doctor, who identified herself only as Yelena, confided that her husband and mother-in-law were strongly opposed to her attending the pro-democracy protests here on Sunday, muted as they were compared with those in Kiev.As she hovered nervously on the edge of the action, two friends — both teachers and, like Yelena, in their 40s — joined her.“Fascism won’t advance!” their opponents chanted.“I ask you,” said one of the trio, also named Yelena, “are we three fascists?”