MEXICO CITY — In Hollywood terms, it was small change. But for Miguel Coyula, a Cuban filmmaker accustomed to working on a tiny budget, the $5,200 he raised on the crowdfunding site Indiegogo.com last year would have bought some lighting equipment, a Steadicam and a tripod, all crucial for his science-fiction feature, “Blue Heart.”However, Indiegogo suspended the campaign in August and froze the money after determining that transferring funds to Cuba or a Cuban resident would violate the United States’ economic embargo.“It was like someone pulling the rug from under your feet,” said Mr. Coyula, who spoke in English by phone from Havana. “That was when I realized I was really on my own, that making a movie in Cuba is hard because both the Cuban government makes it difficult, and the American government makes it difficult.”Cuban filmmaking has changed significantly in recent years, as the state’s role has shrunk, digital technology has made independent productions more feasible, and the Internet has opened tantalizing avenues to funding. More and more of the contemporary Cuban movies selected for international festivals like the Havana Film Festival New York, which runs through Friday, are made with little or no input from state institutions.What hasn’t changed, however, are the financial and legal restrictions that make transferring money to Cuba illegal without a special license from the United States Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control. Those restrictions also prevent Americans from investing in Cuban movies and prohibit Americans from making most films on the island.While the United States government dedicates millions of dollars each year to programs intended to promote civil society and democracy there, experts on Cuban film say the embargo is hindering the growth of a cinema that is increasingly independent of the state and often offers a raw reflection of Cuban life or pokes fun at the government. Movies like “Pablo” (2012), by Yosmani Acosta, which deals with domestic violence, and “Chamaco” (2010), by Juan Carlos Cremata, about male prostitution, explore subjects discussed on the street but rarely in the news media. Mr. Coyula’s 2010 movie, “Memories of Overdevelopment,” includes a scene in which the protagonist talks to a walking cane with a dog’s head as if he were addressing Fidel Castro. “Lie to me some more,” he tells it. At a screening in Havana, the audience burst into applause.“Precisely as independent filmmakers are telling stories in new ways, using new genres, exploring Cuban reality in ways that even hard-liners in the U.S. would see as positive, the embargo is preventing them” from accessing American capital and exchanging ideas and know-how with their American counterparts, said Ann Marie Stock, director of film and media studies at the College of William and Mary, who has written a book on independent Cuban film.The sanctions prohibit most people under American jurisdiction from investing in or trading with Cuba, or traveling there without a license from the Treasury office. Financial institutions have been fined hundreds of millions of dollars in recent years for handling Cuban transactions.A representative of the office would not comment on how the economic sanctions apply to film, but the guidelines published on the Treasury’s website stipulate that Americans may only make a movie in Cuba as part of a research project. Thus documentaries are among the few productions allowed.That’s not to say the worlds of Cuban and American filmmaking have been disconnected. Under the Obama administration, cultural ties between the two countries have increased, as regulations restricting travel loosened, and the United States granted more visas to Cuban artists.Simon Kilmurry, executive director of the PBS documentary series “POV,” will visit Cuba this month to show American documentaries as part of a tour organized by the nonprofit Americas Media Initiative, which distributes Cuban productions overseas. Thousands of American students visit Cuba each year to make documentaries, write articles, study film, music and fine art, or carry out research.The embargo is not the only, or the biggest, hindrance to film production. Directors and experts say the Cuban government does its part in hampering filmmakers, keeping politically provocative movies out of theaters, not recognizing private production companies, and making it hard for filmmakers to obtain permits for, say, filming on the street.“It’s absurd that we are in the 21st century, and we have no legal framework for independent producers,” said the director Esteban Insausti, whose 2010 feature, “Long Distance,” explores emigration and the trauma of separation.Still, the threat of prosecution by the Treasury Department and the complicated process for getting a license are enough to make many organizations back away.Ubaldo Huerta, a Cuban technology expert who lives in Barcelona, shut down Yagruma, a crowdfunding platform specifically for Cuban projects, in February 2013, a little more than a year after he started it.The site financed 11 projects, for example raising 1,200 euros (about $1,650) to help make “The Last Act,” a vivid stop-motion short by Harold Rensoli. But in August 2012, PayPal, which was processing payments for Yagruma, suspended Mr. Huerta’s account out of concern that the site was violating the embargo. Mr. Huerta explored the possibility of a license from the Treasury office, but said he was told by officials it would be turned down. He suspended the site rather than risk a fine, and was unable to find a PayPal alternative that didn’t have American connections.“It was a way of supporting Cubans, of building a bridge,” Mr. Huerta said. “But I was playing with fire.”Indiegogo, meanwhile, declined to comment on Mr. Coyula’s case, saying in a statement that “we must follow American law, which at this time prohibits transferring money to Cuba.”Mr. Coyula said that Indiegogo returned most of the contributions from the campaign’s 57 backers, who had donated $20 to $500 apiece. “Blue Heart,” which will use newsreels, animé and fiction to tell the story of a failed experiment to create a perfect revolutionary through genetic engineering, will cost about $30,000 to make, he said.Alexandra Halkin, director of the Americas Media Initiative, said that crowdfunding had opened a window — however briefly — in a country where there are few nonprofit foundations to fund the arts and little government support, and where filmmakers are often disqualified from grants from American institutions because of the embargo. Mr. Rensoli, who used his Yagruma proceeds to buy a camera that allowed him to create a streaking effect that suggests motion in a still photo, said he has had no luck raising money since.Non-American sources are available, and Cuba has co-produced dozens of movies with production companies from countries like Spain, France and Mexico or with financing, for example, from Ibermedia, a state-sponsored program to fund Latin films. But money from Spain, for example, has become much harder to obtain because of the economic slump there. And the United States would be a “natural funder” of Cuban film, Ms. Halkin said, given the countries’ shared history.Mr. Huerta said he does not believe the embargo was meant to thwart such projects. “We’re collateral damage,” he said.That damage comes in different guises. Alejandro Brugués, a Cuban-Argentine filmmaker, twice tried to get Dolby to certify the sound quality of his films, but Dolby turned down his requests because he was working in Cuba.“They basically said, ‘No, and we can’t have any contact with you,’ ” Mr. Brugués said by phone from Los Angeles.Mr. Brugués, whose €2.5-million zombie movie, “Juan of the Dead,” was financed via Spain, said that he would have to shoot his latest movie, about a Cuban heist, elsewhere because it had American backing.For Cuban workers, that means missing out on contracts worth thousands of dollars, which could boost the island’s clutch of new production companies.Mr. Insausti said artists should keep testing the barriers set up by both countries. For “Long Distance,” for example, the Cuban government allowed Zulema Clares, a Cuban actress living in New York, to return to the island. “You have to push the line and see what happens,” he said. “Maybe it moves a little.”Right now, though, experts said, the American film industry is missing the chance to use the island as a production site and exchange ideas with Cuban filmmakers, who for decades have relied on Europe for backing and co-productions.“We in the U.S. are limiting ourselves from hooking up with some real, young talent,” Ms. Stock said. “These folks will go places, but they’ll go there with Spanish, Mexican production companies and not with U.S. companies.”She added, “We are missing opportunities, both economically and creatively.”