Ubuntu: loosely, “I am because you are.” This fall, the Nguni Bantu term for human kindness, in usage across South Africa, becomes the rallying cry for Carnegie Hall’s festival dedicated to the music of that nation. As such, it celebrates a sense of community that has been tested for much of that country’s recent history, and that continues to be redefined today, 20 years after the arrival of democracy.As might be expected, a festival celebrating the music of this rainbow nation offers a scintillating array of styles and genres. Over the course of four weeks, from Oct. 8 to Nov. 5, Ubuntu: Music and Arts of South Africa will offer recitals by rising opera stars, teenage drumming workshops, musical theater performances and concerts by jazz greats, including the pianist Abdullah Ibrahim and the trumpeter Hugh Masekela, at Carnegie and other New York City locations.The classical-music component shines a spotlight on two vocal stars, the sopranos Elza van den Heever and Pretty Yende. Both have impressed audiences at the Metropolitan Opera; both will offer solo recitals at Weill Recital Hall spanning music from Handel to Debussy.For music by South African contemporary classical composers, head to the Juilliard School, where Joel Sachs conducts the fierce New Juilliard Ensemble in a program of new works by composers including Robert Fokkens, Andile Khumalo and Bongani Ndodana-Breen.The violinist Daniel Hope teamed up with his father, the writer Christopher Hope, for a specially commissioned piece of musical theater about Nat Nakasa, one of South Africa’s most celebrated writers, who committed suicide in Harlem in 1965.Loosely modeled on Stravinsky’s “Soldier’s Tale,” the work, “A Distant Drum,” promises defiant humor mixed into the story’s darkness, and will feature a small cast of actors and musicians, including the stylistically globe-trotting cellist Vincent Segal, at Zankel Hall. At Nakasa’s funeral in Hartsdale, N.Y. — he was buried a few feet from Malcolm X — Mr. Masekela was in attendance with Miriam Makeba, then his wife, who sang a Zulu lament. Ms. Makeba will be honored in a musical tribute by Angélique Kidjo at Carnegie.Mr. Masekela, joined by his son Sal, headlines his own show at Carnegie. Its title: “Twenty Years of Freedom.”