Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo gets strong marks for his aggressive response to the Ebola virus. But some voters are unsettled by what they view as his back-room, bullying style and by a federal investigation into an anti-corruption commission he established.Few New Yorkers say the governor inspires them in the way that the mere mention of his father, former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, still does. At least, they say, Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, has not embarrassed the office, unlike his immediate predecessors.New Yorkers have had four years to size up the policies, personality and governing tendencies of Mr. Cuomo, a 56-year-old former state attorney general and Clinton administration housing secretary. And by all measures, they appear ready to give him a comfortable re-election victory on Tuesday over his Republican challenger, Rob Astorino, the Westchester County executive.Still, New Yorkers’ relationship with their governor is hardly warm or enthusiastic, despite broad agreement with his policies, according to more than three dozen interviews conducted over the past week in New York City and on Long Island.Maybe a collective shrug, or a begrudging thumbs up, would be a more apt description. “I don’t like Cuomo — I just think he’s an opportunist, and I haven’t seen him take a stand that’s risky at all,” said Steve Fromhart, a 47-year-old freelance writer, as he dropped off his children at school in Park Slope, Brooklyn. “But I guess I’ll vote for him. It’s a sad state of affairs.”While several people said they were unlikely to vote at all, only a handful who said they had backed Mr. Cuomo in 2010 said they would vote for someone else this time.Fortunately for Mr. Cuomo, most of those interviewed knew nothing about Mr. Astorino. One even thought he was a she. A few people did hold an unfavorable view of Mr. Astorino, however, thanks to an attack ad featuring him joking that Medicaid recipients could live on soup if their dentures were no longer covered.Then again, a good number of people who spoke at length about Mr. Cuomo (as opposed to the dozens more who said they were indifferent, or uninformed) also struggled to identify any of his specific policies or actions.On Sunday, both the governor and Mr. Astorino spent much of their time north of the city. Mr. Cuomo visited Baptist churches in New Rochelle and Mount Vernon in Westchester County before holding a rally in West Haverstraw, in Rockland County. He chronicled his efforts to reform state government, criticized Mr. Astorino as intolerant and urged voters to turn out as if the race were close. “People shouldn’t get complacent,” he said.Mr. Astorino wooed black and Hispanic voters at churches in New Rochelle and the Bronx, where he urged congregants to vote based on values, rather than party, and accused Mr. Cuomo of attacking his faith. “When he attacks me for being a Christian, he is attacking all of you,” Mr. Astorino said at Heavenly Vision Christian Center in the Bronx, where he spoke in Spanish to the largely Latino congregation.In conversations with voters last week, though, one thing that people seemed to agree on, from Rockville Centre in Nassau County to Pelham Parkway in the Bronx to Chelsea in Manhattan, was that the Cuomo name remained golden.In Forest Hills, Queens, Alita Kleiner, 66, a retired legal secretary, and Bruce Brenner, 71, a retired city employee, said that even though they were Republicans, they liked Mr. Cuomo’s father as a forceful, yet open-minded leader. And while both criticized the younger Mr. Cuomo for ignoring his liberal challenger in the Democratic primary, Zephyr Teachout, during the Labor Day parade in September, they said one rude act did not detract from his overall performance.“Cuomo has the experience, he has the family background — reminds me of the Kennedy family,” Mr. Brenner said. “Astorino, I don’t like. I don’t think he’d be right for New York. We’re Republicans, but we’re not ultraconservative.”“His brother is good on TV,” Ms. Kleiner added, referring to Chris Cuomo, the CNN news anchor.The governor benefited, too, from having succeeded David A. Paterson (labeled “hapless” by one person) and, before him, Eliot Spitzer (whose fall from grace still stings for many).“I think he’s the best,” said Om Verma, 51, an immigration paralegal in Hollis, Queens, Mr. Cuomo’s childhood neighborhood. “He’s smart, he’s educated, and his father is great.” He added, shaking his head, “If you compare to other governors, well, you saw what that guy was doing in Washington, D.C.”Mr. Cuomo’s brash style, though, polarizes many New Yorkers. “Initially, I had a good impression of him — he’s a Democrat, I’m a Democrat,” said Jamie Pagirsky, 22, a recent graduate of the State University of New York at New Paltz who lives in Rockville Centre. “But over time, that changed.”Mr. Pagirsky said that his view of the governor had been sharply affected when Mr. Cuomo spoke on campus last fall, and a friend, Jaklin Levine-Pritzker, wore a T-shirt saying “NY Says No to Fracking.” A gruff and beefy Cuomo aide tried to eject her from the lecture, then demanded that she turn her T-shirt inside out, because of fears that she would be too disruptive, according to Mr. Pagirsky and Ms. Levine-Pritzker, who confirmed his account. She ultimately was allowed to stay, but the incident irked her classmates. And when she told Mr. Pagirsky about it, the image stuck with him.“We were all in disbelief — Is this real? Is this happening to my close friend? Is this how his administration operates?" he said. “This is supposed to be a healthy democracy, and this was completely obstructing that process. After that incident, I was just completely turned off by him.”Many of those interviewed also cited the Moreland Commission, the anti-corruption group set up by Mr. Cuomo that is now the subject of an inquiry by federal prosecutors.Julia Beardwood, a branding and marketing executive from Park Slope, said Mr. Cuomo had been a “disappointment” because “the whole corruption issue seems to be something he dealt with inappropriately.”Ms. Beardwood said she also did not like the governor’s reluctance to embrace the prekindergarten expansion that was the signature issue of her former neighbor, Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat. As a result, she said, she voted for Ms. Teachout in the primary because she seemed “more honest and less political.”Still, she said she would vote for Mr. Cuomo on Tuesday “because I don’t have a better option.”“In the long run,” she added, “I hope that he will see the light.”Such criticisms were not universal, especially among New Yorkers who said they admired the bluntness of former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, both Republicans.Lisa Catanzarite, 38, a home health care worker from Gravesend, Brooklyn, said she liked what she called Mr. Cuomo’s “iron fist” persona, and rolled her eyes when asked about the Moreland Commission. “Find me a clean politician,” she deadpanned.Ms. Catanzarite was one of dozens interviewed who praised Mr. Cuomo’s decision, with Mr. Christie, to impose tougher quarantines on people returning to New York and New Jersey after coming into contact with Ebola patients. Many people said they felt the governor should not have backtracked in the face of pressure from medical professionals and the White House.Maureen Anzalone, 63, a health care eligibility liaison in Pelham Parkway, shared that opinion, and even invoked Kaci Hickox, the nurse placed under quarantine in Newark.“He gave in a little to the nurse about the Ebola hoopla — she should’ve bitten the bullet,” said Ms. Anzalone, 63, speaking about a block from the campaign headquarters of State Senator Jeffrey D. Klein, a Democrat. “But I’m mostly satisfied. I think he’s a little rough around the edges, like, in a ‘Don’t mess with me’ kind of way.”With Ebola dominating recent headlines, no other topic came up as much during the interviews. A few voters mentioned education, with people split over Mr. Cuomo’s aggressive support for charter schools. Some mentioned small businesses and the economy.One retired Hollis resident, Barry Lowe, who used to run a window-display business in Manhattan, also criticized Mr. Cuomo’s trip to Israel this summer. Mr. Lowe said the governor should have been more evenhanded in the way he addressed the long-running conflict there. “He didn’t act as if the Palestinians were going through terrible times,” he said.“I was going to vote for him, but I’m not going to now,” said Mr. Lowe, 70.Only a handful of people mentioned one of Mr. Cuomo’s hallmark achievements: the legalization of same-sex marriage.In Chelsea, the political base of one of Mr. Cuomo’s most ardent supporters, Christine C. Quinn, the former City Council speaker, Eddie Jacobs, a 48-year-old financial services salesman, said he did not care for the governor’s Ebola response (an overreaction, Mr. Jacobs said) or handling of the Moreland Commission (an overreach).But he recalled an event, hosted by Empire State Pride Agenda, at which Mr. Cuomo promised to legalize same-sex marriage — and noted that the governor had succeeded. “I have a very warm spot in my heart because Cuomo pushed through gay marriage,” he said. “That’s good enough for me.”One thing that was clearly working for Mr. Cuomo, the interviews showed, was his campaign advertising. Several voters mentioned that they liked his television commercials, particularly a recent one featuring his daughters and longtime girlfriend, Sandra Lee, in which the governor pledged to fight for women’s issues.To Fred Carbo, owner of Fortunata’s Fine Foods, in Rockville Centre, the ad encapsulated much of what he had come to appreciate about Mr. Cuomo.He said he liked Mr. Cuomo’s commitment to help women fight for a fair wage. A resident of Howard Beach, Queens, who had a food business in Breezy Point that was destroyed in Hurricane Sandy, Mr. Carbo said he was also reminded, with the second anniversary of the storm, of what he said was the “good job” the Cuomo administration had done helping him and his neighbors recover.And now, as the owner of a business in Nassau County, just down the block from the campaign headquarters of State Senator Dean G. Skelos, a Republican, Mr. Carbo said he was reminded of the governor’s efforts to cap property taxes. “I think he’s tried his best,” Mr. Carbo said. “How do you please everybody? You can’t."