Since Russia’s annexation of Crimea from Ukraine in March, President Vladimir V. Putin has used strong language to inspire nationalist support at home and encourage pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine. Here are 10 recent examples.‘True Sovereignty for Russia Is Absolutely Necessary for Survival’ - Dec. 4, 2014In his state of the nation speech, Mr. Putin  used the same aggrieved, angry tone he has often adopted in his public pronouncements since the Ukrainian crisis erupted in March. The West reacted to the annexation of Crimea and the conflict in Ukraine by imposing sanctions, but Mr. Putin said those events were just a pretext.“This is not just a nervous reaction of the United States and its allies to our position with regards to events and the coup in Ukraine,” he said in his 70-minute speech.“If all that had not happened, they would have come up with a different mode to restrain Russia,” Mr. Putin said, accusing the West of pursuing the same policy for “decades if not centuries.”‘If Europe Does Not Want This to Be Realized, Then It Will Not Be Realized’  - Dec. 1Even in retreat, Mr. Putin tries to take the offensive.When a Russian project to build a major pipeline to southern Europe was blocked by Bulgaria, he redirected the project toward Turkey and chastised the Bulgarians. The initial deal was caught up in the political and diplomatic quarrel over Ukraine, as Western powers became determined to resist Mr. Putin’s aggressive policies at every turn.“If Europe does not want this to be realized, then it will not be realized,” he said, calling it “ridiculous” to invest hundreds of millions of dollars in the pipeline through Bulgaria only to have to abandon it.“But such is the decision of our European friends,” he said, adding a jab that Bulgaria, by giving in to pressure, had been “deprived of the opportunity to act as a sovereign state.”‘You Can Do a Lot More With Weapons and Politeness Than Just Politeness’ -Nov. 17At an exhibition of armored personnel carriers in Moscow, Mr. Putin observed that “you can do a lot more with weapons and politeness than just politeness,” a reference to the “polite” Russian soldiers who appeared in Crimea in early March.When Mr. Putin welcomed the new American ambassador and 14 other diplomats to Moscow a few days later, he seemed to soften his tone, saying the two countries could find avenues of practical cooperation if the partnership were based on “mutual respect and pragmatism.”“We are ready for practical cooperation with our American partners in all different areas, based on the principles of respect for each other’s interests, equality and nonintervention in domestic affairs,” Mr. Putin said. “We take the view that Russia and the United States bear special responsibility for maintaining international security and stability and combating global threats and challenges.”U.S. Backs ‘Neo-Fascists’ and ‘Islamic Radicals’ -Oct. 24At an international meeting of Russia experts in the southern resort town of Sochi, Mr. Putin said that American meddling has sparked most of the world’s recent crises, including those in Ukraine and the Middle East.Instead of supporting democracy and sovereign states, Mr. Putin said the United States supports “dubious” groups ranging from “open neo-fascists to Islamic radicals.”“Why do they support such people,” he asked at the annual gathering known as the Valdai Club. “They do this because they decide to use them as instruments along the way in achieving their goals, but then burn their fingers and recoil.”‘All I Have to Do Is Smile’ - Oct. 2“All I have to do is smile, and show the devil is not as frightening as he seems,” Mr. Putin told reporters after a speech to Russian business leaders, explaining how he can attract investment to Russia.Appearing relaxed and joking with the financiers who gathered in Moscow for a banking conference, Mr. Putin tried to soothe worries that Russia was headed into a deep recession.I Could ‘Take Kiev in Two Weeks’ - Sept. 1Mr. Putin told the president of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso, that he could “take Kiev in two weeks” if he wanted to, adding a new dimension to the conflict in Ukraine as Russian forces became more involved in the fighting there.‘The Statehood’ of Southeast Ukraine - Aug. 31As unrest continued, Mr. Putin issued a provocative call to begin discussion of “statehood” for Ukraine’s restive southeast.“We must immediately begin substantive, meaningful negotiations, not on technical questions, but about the political organization of society and the statehood of Ukraine’s southeast for the unconditional securing of the legal interests of the people who live there,” he said.In a television interview after his speech, Mr. Putin veered between veiled threats and demands for negotiations to resolve the conflict in Ukraine.‘It Is Clear the Militia Has Achieved a Major Success’ - Aug. 29In an otherwise mundane statement posted on the Kremlin website, Mr. Putin refers to the “Novorossiya” or New Russia, militia, a pointed reference to rebel fighters in Ukraine who represent the broader New Russia favored by Russian nationalists.“It is clear the militia has achieved a major success in intercepting Kiev’s military operation, which represents a grave danger to the population of Donbass and which has already led to the loss of many lives among peaceful residents,” he said.Behind the message, analysts saw several Kremlin goals: a political order that weakens Kiev’s control in Ukraine, easing of pressure on increasingly beleaguered rebel forces in Luhansk and Donetsk, and possibly a land route to Crimea.‘We’ll Strangle All of Them Ourselves!’ - April 17“We’ll strangle all of them ourselves! Why are you so afraid?” Mr. Putin responded brazenly when asked in a television question-and-answer session in April how Russia might respond to NATO expansion in Eastern Europe. “We aren’t afraid — neither me nor anyone else. Nobody should be afraid, but we must proceed from reality.”He also reminded viewers that he would authorize the use of force to protect Russian-speaking residents in Ukraine.“We must do everything to help these people to protect their rights and independently determine their own destiny.”‘Crimea Has Always Been an Inseparable Part of Russia’ - March 18Noting that the United States and its NATO allies “have lied to us many times, made decisions behind our backs,” Mr. Putin delivered an emotional speech in the Grand Kremlin Palace reclaiming Crimea as part of Russia and reversing what he described as a historic injustice.He cited the threat Russia faced by an expanding NATO presence in Eastern Europe, adding:“Let me note too that we have already heard declarations from Kiev about Ukraine soon joining NATO. What would this have meant for Crimea and Sevastopol in the future? It would have meant that NATO’s navy would be right there in this city of Russia’s military glory, and this would create not an illusory but a perfectly real threat to the whole of southern Russia.”