The bad news about the season premiere of “The Walking Dead” on AMC Sunday night was that the survivors who lured the heroes to a so-called sanctuary turned out to be cannibals.The good news is that they were not elitists.Dystopian parables like “The Walking Dead,” where zombies rule the earth, are an increasingly fashionable genre of entertainment, but the degree of apocalyptic pessimism is very different depending on the size of the screen.The dividing line between television and movies seems to be class conflict.Television shows posit a hideous future with a silver lining; survivors, good or bad, are more or less equals. Movies like “Divergent,” “Snowpiercer” and “Elysium” foresee societal divisions that last into Armageddon and beyond and that define a new, inevitably Orwellian world order that emerges from the ruins of civilization.The audiences are not different. It’s not as if only socialists eager to see management oppress the worker buy movie tickets to see “Elysium,” while the more democratically minded prefer to stay home and watch “The Leftovers.”So it must be Hollywood itself. Outsiders see show business as an exclusive world of wealth, fame and privilege, but those who work in movies mostly feel besieged: Box office returns for the larger studios are generally down; there are barriers to rich film markets like China; and competition from television and the Internet keeps growing, leaving movie people feeling diminished and in decline. Maybe Hollywood’s obsession with oppression and elitism is an unconscious expression of the filmmakers’ own fears of subjugation.Television, meanwhile, is in such ascendance that some of the best-known filmmakers, including Steven Spielberg, have pitched tents there. Television creators are smugly secure in what appears to be an ever-expanding multiplatform universe.Movies project a morose, scary future where man is his own worst enemy, whereas television can’t entirely suppress a smile.There is something positive about the end of the world on shows like “The Walking Dead,” and “Z Nation” on Syfy and “The Last Ship,” on TNT. True, civilization as we know it is gone, but so is social stratification. Survivors don’t group into castes according to birth, race, income or religion. People of all kinds bond with whomever seems friendly, or at least unthreatening.In the third season of “The Walking Dead,” a charismatic leader known as the Governor did establish a totalitarian community, Woodbury, but even there, people weren’t divided into social subgroups. And happily, his cultlike dictatorship was eventually destroyed.The anthropophagites on “The Walking Dead” on Sunday didn’t discriminate between Daryl the redneck and Rick, a sheriff’s deputy. In their abattoir, everyone was equal under the carving knife.It’s worth noting that even the cannibals were not full-on monsters. They began as a fairly heterogeneous band of survivors, much like Rick and his followers, who created a peaceful haven at a train terminal and made the mistake of trusting the wrong visitors. Their community was taken over by rapists and murderers, and after they won it back, their slogan became “Never Again.” As one of the women who cheerfully grilled human fillets put it, “You’re the butcher, or you’re the cattle.”All sorts of people form alliances against the zombies in “Z Nation.” On “The Last Ship,” a deadly virus wipes out most of the world population, but the men and women aboard a Navy destroyer avoid contagion. The shipmates maintain military discipline and the proper chain of command as they roam the seas trying to develop a vaccine and bring it home. Even their enemies stay true to their pre-Armageddon selves: escaped Gitmo prisoners and Russian naval officers who don’t think the war is over just because the world is.“The Leftovers,” a 10-episode HBO series, was one of the bleakest fantasies in recent years: One day, 2 percent of the world’s population vanishes. There is no pattern: Maids, movie stars, the pope and airline pilots alike disappear. The people left behind struggle to resume a normal life, and weird cults form, like the Guilty Remnant, survivors who take a vow of silence and only wear white. But democracy isn’t wiped out, and ordinary people are not enslaved by the 1 percent.The world is all but destroyed and almost unspeakably grim in movies like “Snowpiercer” and “Elysium” and “The Zero Theorem,” but that’s not even the half of it. There isn’t much left except the enmity of haves and have-nots: A tyrannical ruling class — or Big Brother — hoards precious resources and enslaves the mob.In “Elysium,” a film that starred Matt Damon and Jodie Foster, the ruling class moves into a space habitat, living in luxury and perfect health with medical devices so advanced they can reverse the aging process. On Earth the unchosen live in wretched deprivation, policed by killer robots.“Snowpiercer,” with Ed Harris, has the same nightmare scenario, only after an experiment to counteract global warming freezes the world into a new ice age, the surviving elite are at the head of a super-train, whereas the unwashed masses are enslaved at the tail end. Their betters keep telling the rabble that survival depends on everyone staying in their “preordained, particular positions.” (In the Venn diagram of dystopian movies, the intersection is commanded by Tilda Swinton, who was recently in both “Snowpiercer” and “The Zero Theorem,” and Mr. Damon, who was in “The Zero Theorem” as well as “Elysium.”)Dystopian movies based on young-adult novels understandably focus on the oppression of young adults, but in “Divergent” and “The Hunger Games,” a despotic elite divides the little people into cliques, only there is no prom in sight.Engels wrote about “contests between exploiting and exploited, ruling and oppressed classes.” He meant in the movies. On TV, all men are equal and equally at peril in the apocalypse.