BERKELEY, Calif. —  Fifty years ago Wednesday, Jack Weinberg sat in the back of a police car on the University of California campus here for 32 hours while thousands of students blocked the vehicle’s exit, protesting Mr. Weinberg’s arrest on charges of manning an information table about the civil rights movement. The demonstrators politely removed their shoes — to avoid scratching the vehicle — before climbing to the roof of the patrol car, which became a pulpit for grievances.“It was an open mike,” Mr. Weinberg recalled, returning to campus this week to commemorate the birth of what became known as the Free Speech Movement, of which he was a chief tactician.His arrest on Oct. 1, 1964, and confinement in the police car marked the beginning of widespread student activism at Berkeley, which would spread to other campuses, fueling the antiwar movement and other political causes while empowering their conservative critics. At Berkeley, where tables with political literature were not allowed, Mr. Weinberg and others argued that the right to free speech — to mobilize on civil rights and other issues — should not be denied them because they were at the university.When negotiations with university administrators failed, students occupied the administration building; 700 were arrested, leading to a student strike.“You felt empowered,” said Mr. Weinberg, 74, who now has gray hair and an avuncular smile. “We were able to make very fundamental changes in society.”On Wednesday, the old activists held a rally, drawing a crowd of 300 to 400. About half of them seemed to have been among the hundreds of students in the 1960s who were perceived as revolutionaries and troublemakers.Many were wearing straw hats and sandals, and yellow ribbons in support of the pro-democracy students in Hong Kong. Young people printed tweets about the rally, hanging them on a clothesline.Lynne Hollander Savio, the widow of the movement’s main orator, Mario Savio, addressed the crowd. Another speaker read a message from Edward J. Snowden, who leaked voluminous amounts of classified documents from the National Security Agency, which said, “Together we will restore the public seat at the table of government.”Several dozen young people held aloft signs about bullying, fossil fuels, the redwoods and dissent. Many more speed-walked across the plaza, oblivious to the authorized event.Ms. Savio, 73, said in an interview that if her husband, who died in 1996, were alive, he would want to convey to students “a feeling of optimism.” He would tell them, she said, “Don’t underestimate the power of people to make change.”Few current students interviewed seem to know much about the rise of activism that began on their campus. Today’s students “are very passionate about animal rights, green energy, niche issues,” said Chloe Hunt, the editor of the student newspaper, The Daily Californian.The rally on Wednesday was part of a semester-long celebration of the Free Speech Movement. Several dozen undergraduate courses are being offered on the movement, and the schedule of campus events includes poetry readings, a singalong and panel discussions on inequality, activism and voter suppression. All freshmen were asked to read “Freedom’s Orator: Mario Savio and the Radical Legacy of the 1960s” by Robert Cohen, a New York University history professor and visiting Berkeley lecturer teaching a course on the 1960s.This week, Mr. Cohen asked students to compare speeches given by Mr. Savio with one by Ronald Reagan, who was a candidate for governor, in which he said “so-called Freedom of Speech advocates” had “no appreciation of freedom.” He said the campus had become a “rallying point for Communists.”Mr. Cohen took Mr. Weinberg to class along with three other Free Speech Movement veterans. They laughed at the accusation.Today, Mr. Weinberg is best known for a remark he made 50 years ago when brushing aside a reporter’s contention that students were inspired by Communists, telling him, “We have a saying in the movement that we don’t trust anyone over 30.”Mr. Weinberg, who went on to become an environmental health organizer, stands by his statement. “Young movements have a certain integrity,” he said.To Chancellor Nicholas Dirks, a scholar of Indian history with an interest in Gandhi and civil disobedience who was 13 in 1964, the movement is worthy of study.“It is an opportunity to show how Berkeley in the past was a leader in what were critical issues and that students indeed can be leaders again,” he said, adding that it was important to retain the university’s uniqueness, “this mixture of excellence and unruliness.”But much has changed. Back then, the student body was predominantly white and a Berkeley education was virtually free.Today, the student body is 39 percent Asian, 13 percent Latino, 29 percent white and 3 percent African-American. A Berkeley education costs about $13,000 a year for Californians, $36,000 for nonresidents. The largest undergraduate majors are integrative biology, computer science and applied mathematics.“It is not my job to encourage activism,” Dr. Dirks said, but he has asked students “Why does it not occur to you to be politically active, to put pressure on Sacramento to fund higher education?” He found, he said, that they “have a sense of powerlessness.”Several students pointed out, however, that political activism was far from dead at Berkeley on the left and on the right.“What worries me in all this celebration is that we forget what freedom of speech actually means,” said Claire Chiara, the president of the Berkeley Campus Republicans. “No professor ever flat out doesn’t let you voice your opinion,” she said, but when she does, she is accustomed to “feeling uncomfortable,” and professors saying, “That’s one way someone could look at it.”As for Mr. Weinberg, he had a few words of encouragement for today’s students. “Don’t be discouraged,” he said, “We well could be on the cusp of another period of social movement.”But Berkeley today is probably much more enlightened than it was then, he said. Fifty years ago, “the status quo was no longer tolerable,” Mr. Weinberg said. “The university was on the wrong side of history.”