MANILA —  The biggest political crisis that President Benigno S. Aquino III of the Philippines has faced in four years in power could damage his image as a crusader against corruption and undermine his ability to deliver on overhauls to sustain strong economic growth.The Supreme Court has declared partly illegal a 145 billion peso, or $3.34 billion, economic stimulus fund that Mr. Aquino created in 2011 from budget savings.Economists are concerned that controversy over the stimulus is slowing public spending because officials are wary about accusations of recklessness and are subjecting decisions to more scrutiny.“If this leads to a slowdown in spending, the risk to growth is on the downside,” Shanaka Jayanath Peiris, the  International Monetary Fund’s resident representative in the Philippines, said on Friday.The I.M.F. cut its growth forecast on Friday for the Philippines to 6.2 percent from the 6.5 percent it forecast in March, partly because of slower spending. The government has set a target of a growth rate of 6.5 percent to 7.5 percent for gross domestic product this year, after 7.2 percent last year.First-quarter G.D.P. growth was at its slowest in two years, in part because of weaker state spending, which grew an annual 2 percent in the period, compared with 10 percent growth a year earlier.Henry J. Schumacher, vice president at the European Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines, said any more delays to much-needed infrastructure would be a “disaster.”“There is an over-carefulness in a number of government offices not to move before they are absolutely sure that every angle where integrity could be compromised has been looked at,” Mr. Schumacher said.Jose Rene Almendras, secretary to the cabinet, told a local television station last week that the Supreme Court ruling on the stimulus fund had “a chilling effect on everyone.”Under the stimulus plan, Mr. Aquino spent money saved from canceled projects on the housing and relocation of slum residents; radar units for the weather bureau; and infusing capital into the central bank to help it with its market intervention, among other activities.A portion of the money was distributed to senators to use on projects of their choice.The Supreme Court said aspects of the stimulus were unconstitutional. It did not call any actions criminal, though lawyers say the ruling could open the way for allegations of wrongdoing.Critics said the allocation of funds to senators for their projects cast doubt on Mr. Aquino’s commitment to stamp out corruption.“Everyone who has to sign a document now has to be doubly sure,” Mr. Almendras said in the television interview.Mr. Aquino is the only son of highly respected parents: an assassinated opponent of dictatorship and a democracy hero who became the country’s first female president.He won the presidency in 2010 on a promise of good governance and fighting graft but has struggled to rid the country of its image as one of the most corrupt in Asia.On Monday, he delivered his next-to-last state of the nation speech at a joint session of Congress. Two impeachment complaints related to the stimulus funds have been filed against Mr. Aquino in the weeks since the court ruling, accusing him of betraying the public trust and violating the Constitution.But there is little danger Mr. Aquino will be ousted, because his allies dominate both houses of Congress.He also enjoys the support of the army.Still, his approval ratings plunged to a record low in June and they may fall again as a result of the Supreme Court decision.While he is likely to survive the scandal, it could have implications for his party’s candidate in the presidential election in 2016. Mr. Aquino cannot be a candidate, as the Constitution says a president can be elected for only one six-year term.The current controversies “are definitely a blow to President Aquino’s image as the poster boy of good governance,” said Eugenia Victorino, economist at ANZ in Singapore.