WASHINGTON — Congress may have banned earmarks to pay for pet projects in the districts of powerful lawmakers, but pork continues to find its way into spending legislation, though in smaller amounts and with more stealth, a fiscal watchdog group said on Wednesday.Some 109 projects worth a total of $2.7 billion were included in the 2014 budget at the request of individual lawmakers, according to an analysis by Citizens Against Government Waste, a fiscally conservative group, which calls the report the Pig Book.These projects included $130 million for a program to promote democracy around the world, which the Obama administration did not ask for; $90 million for a highly mobile tank that the Defense Department does not want; and $45 million meant to stop cross-border drug trafficking that was directed mostly to nonborder states.The dollar figures are down considerably from a record $29 billion in 2006 and $16.5 billion in 2010, the year before Congress placed a moratorium on earmarks’ use.Earmarks account for a tiny percentage of total federal spending, but they are valuable to lawmakers who want to curry favor in their districts or states. Congress placed a moratorium on their use in early 2011 after a series of ethical violations involving earmark deals between lawmakers and lobbyists.Since then, some lawmakers have resorted to a practice known as lettermarking or phonemarking, in which money is included in a bill without a specific program attached to it but is then directed to a specific program by a government agency at the request of a lawmaker.Congressional leaders declared the 2014 appropriations legislation to be free of earmarks because funding measures were not linked to specific lawmakers. But the watchdog group found that some programs previously paid for through earmarks were still receiving money, but without names attached.“After only four years on the wagon, it appears that many members of Congress feel a compelling need to once again drink from the trough,” the president of Citizens Against Government Waste, Thomas A. Schatz, said Wednesday as he announced the group’s findings.Mr. Schatz was joined by Republican members of Congress, including Senator John McCain of Arizona and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, as well as someone dressed in a pig costume.The largest spending category by far was the military, which received $1.6 billion, including $866 million for health and disease research that critics call duplicative with civilian programs. It also received $90 million for the ultra-mobile M1 Abrams tank, which has been opposed by the Pentagon.The value of earmarks for the Department of Homeland Security has more than doubled since 2012 to $318 million, including $100 million for the defense of shipping ports.Most of the current lawmakers linked to earmarks for the 2014 fiscal year were Democrats, including many members of Appropriations Committees like Senator Patty Murray of Washington, Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, Senator Mark Begich of Alaska, Senator Tom Udall of New Mexico and Representative James P. Moran of Virginia.Republicans with roles on the Appropriations Committees were also named, including Senators Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Thad Cochran of Mississippi.Also named was Senator Brian Schatz, the Hawaii Democrat who was appointed to succeed Senator Daniel K. Inouye, who died in 2012. Mr. Inouye was chairman of the Appropriations Committee and was an expert at steering money to his state.Some lawmakers have called for an end to the moratorium on earmarks, contending that legislation without sweeteners to attract votes is being stalled. They also say that allowing earmarks would promote transparency in a way that the current rules do not.Fiscal conservatives like Mr. Cruz, a potential contender for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination, disagree.“That’s how you go from $10 trillion to $11 trillion to $12 trillion to $18 trillion” in government debt, Mr. Cruz said. “That’s how you bankrupt this country.”The watchdog group has been compiling reports on earmark spending since 1991, with the exception of 2011 and 2013, because during those years the government was financed by temporary measures instead of appropriations bills.