John Jay negotiated peace with Britain after the American Revolution, served as the first chief justice of the United States and struggled against slavery as governor of New York. But when Jeremy Travis was named president of John Jay College of Criminal Justice a decade ago, Jay’s likeness could barely be found on campus.Since then, a borrowed copy of a Gilbert Stuart portrait was installed on the sixth floor and an etching was hung outside a ninth-floor conference room. On Monday, Jay’s legacy will assume a whole new dimension: A life-size statue of Jay will be dedicated in the Lynn and Jules Kroll Atrium of his namesake college in Manhattan.Ivan Schwartz, who founded the studio where the sculpture was created, would be the perfect professor if the college were ever to offer a forensic course on the limitations of statues."The one thing that really vexes me is that I never get to hear their voices,” he said.Still, not many people can claim to have lived with 42 of the Founding Fathers. Mr. Schwartz has.“I spent years with them,” he said.They were crafted in his studio in Dumbo, Brooklyn, where he also lived (the firm has since moved to Industry City in Brooklyn, he to an apartment in Park Slope), and were stored there while they awaited installation in the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia.Busts of Jay abound, but Mr. Schwartz said he was unaware of another full-frame statue until this one, his latest work.Mr. Schwartz, 63, who grew up in Kew Gardens, Queens, and founded StudioEIS four decades ago with Elliot Schwartz, his brother, was also commissioned to sculpt statues of Abraham Lincoln and Frederick Douglass at the New-York Historical Society, Theodore Roosevelt at the American Museum of Natural History and figures for the National Park Service’s African Burial Ground in Lower Manhattan.“For somebody who went to New York City public schools and did not have a great education in history, it’s been a great ride,” he said.The bronze John Jay stands at 5-foot-10 and weighs 670 pounds, but research by Mr. Schwartz and his partners, including his brother and his sister, Debra, was unable to verify the physique of John Jay, the man.“There are a few things we never find out,” Mr. Schwartz said.The researchers examined portraits by Gilbert Stuart and John Trumbull, and enlisted Stuart Williamson, an artist, to paint a detailed version from which the sculptor, Jiwoong Cheh, created a clay model. They also studied photographs of Jay’s black-satin robe with salmon-colored silk trim (one survives at the Smithsonian’s National Museum of American History), and 19th century descriptions of his “colorless complexion, with blue penetrating eyes, aquiline nose and pointed chin.”Jay is holding the justice’s oath of office, duplicated as closely as possible in his own handwriting.To help choose the statue’s pose, a model dressed in robes posed at the installation site and a half-dozen alternatives were presented to college officials and board members and students.“John Jay is our forgotten Founding Father, one of the greatest New Yorkers, who helped create our democracy,” Mr. Travis said. “Our students, who are devoted to the common good, will be inspired by his example.”The $125,000 statue, financed through private donations and rental income from private events, took a year to make under the supervision of Bj Ervick, the production manager. It was cast at a foundry in Phoenix.“From my point of view, the essential interest is to activate the past,” Mr. Schwartz said. “To do that you have to create some kind of credible narrative and that begins with measurements, what is the action, what does the face look like? In some way one easily falls prey to mimicry, so not having another statue to work from made it a little easier.”