Tom Steyer, the billionaire climate activist, recently contributed $5 million to a “super PAC” dedicated to keeping Democrats in control of the United States Senate, cementing his alliance with the party as the 2014 campaign swings into high gear.Mr. Steyer, a retired hedge fund manager, has used some of his fortune in an effort to make climate change a more potent political issue in pivotal states like Florida, Iowa and Virginia. He is planning to raise $100 million to run campaigns on climate issues, including efforts to persuade lawmakers and the Obama administration to block the proposed Keystone XL pipeline.The contribution, confirmed by a Steyer spokesman and the super PAC, the Senate Majority PAC, makes Mr. Steyer the single largest contributor to the group this year as Democratic donors rush to provide funds to left-leaning groups. Republicans have relied far more heavily on political nonprofit groups that do not disclose their donors.“Our candidates have faced a torrent of outside money of unprecedented scale,” Karyn Brockman, the Senate Majority PAC’s finance director, said in a statement. “As the leading Democratic super PAC, and the only one dedicated to keeping the Senate, we have had record-setting support, but we realize that we must continue to fight back.”Mr. Steyer’s own super PAC, NextGen Climate Action, has also begun running climate-themed ads. Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Mr. Steyer, said the contribution did not mean that Mr. Steyer would go easy on Democrats who disagreed with him, like Senator Mary L. Landrieu of Louisiana, who has supported the Keystone project.“A contribution to Senate Majority PAC, the way they spend it and use it, will be consistent with the criteria that we use to choose our states,” Mr. Lehane said. “And we are going to be doing our own separate campaigns.”But the timing of the donation may spur renewed attacks on Mr. Steyer from Republicans, who have sought to paint him as a one-man special interest group using his money to get Democrats to stop the Keystone project. On Monday, a bipartisan bill to encourage energy efficiency died after Senate Democrats blocked efforts by Republicans to add amendments that would require approval of the pipeline, which would carry carbon-heavy crude from Canada’s Alberta oil sands to Gulf Coast refineries.Such attacks echo the Democrats’ efforts to depict the Republican Party as a tool of the industrialists Charles and David Koch, whose political network has mobilized to help the party win back the Senate this year. This month, Mr. Steyer challenged the Kochs to a debate on climate science, which the Kochs declined.“There’s a history in this country of good policy translating into good politics,” Mr. Lehane said. “It’s critical to truth, justice and democracy that the Senate stay in the hands of people who care about good policy.”As of last month, Mr. Steyer and his wife, Kat Taylor, were the top source of super PAC money in the country this election cycle, contributing a total of more than $11 million. But the bulk of their money has so far gone to Mr. Steyer’s own political organization, NextGen Climate.Mr. Steyer has emerged not only as a top outside ally of Senate Democrats, but also as one of their leading direct supporters. The Senate super PAC’s other big donors include Michael R. Bloomberg, the former New York City mayor, and Fred Eychaner, a Chicago media executive.