BOSTON —  With a terse letter of resignation, a police commissioner in Wolfeboro, N.H., has stepped down after a cascade of complaints objecting to his use of a racial slur to describe President Obama. The commissioner, Robert Copeland, 82, who is also a lawyer, confirmed that he had made the statement. He had said he was exercising his First Amendment right of free speech.But reports of the slur, which was overheard by another diner at a restaurant in March, shone a harsh light on this small resort town of 6,000 on the eastern shore of Lake Winnipesaukee, just as the promise of summer was bringing it back to life.Public officials and people from around the country began inundating the town’s police department with calls for Mr. Copeland’s resignation. Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican presidential nominee and Wolfeboro’s most prominent summer resident, added his criticism. “The vile epithet used and confirmed by the commissioner has no place in our community,” Mr. Romney said in a statement last week. “He should apologize and resign.”Gov. Maggie Hassan, a Democrat, also called for Mr. Copeland’s resignation, with her spokesman saying she believed that Mr. Copeland “should listen to the people of Wolfeboro and New Hampshire and apologize and step down in order to restore confidence in the commission.”About two months lapsed between the incident and the resignation, which was made public on Monday, apparently because town officials wanted to follow proper procedures.Jane O’Toole, the Wolfeboro resident who overheard the remark, publicized it this month, as Mr. Copeland continued in his job.In early March, while Ms. O’Toole was dining with her husband at Nolan’s Brick Oven Bistro in Wolfeboro, she overheard Mr. Copeland speaking with another man. She said she had heard him refer to the president with a vulgarity and a racial slur.She immediately sent a complaint to the town manager, who shared it with the Board of Selectmen. They discussed the incident in the nonpublic portion of their April 9 meeting. They later told Ms. O’Toole that while they found the language reprehensible, they had no power to remove the police commissioner, who is an elected official.Ms. O’Toole also wrote to the three-member police commission. Mr. Copeland emailed a response to his fellow commissioners and forwarded a copy to her.“I believe I did use the ‘N’ word in reference to the current occupant of the Whitehouse,” Mr. Copeland wrote. “For this, I do not apologize — he meets and exceeds my criteria for such.”He told Ms. O’Toole that the other police commissioners had “accepted” his response.Finally, Ms. O’Toole described the incident in a Facebook post and in a letter to the editor of The Granite State News, the local weekly paper. When the newspaper printed her letter, it also printed Mr. Copeland’s response to the commissioners. In an editorial, the newspaper wrote that elected officials like Mr. Copeland, “set the tone of our democracy,” adding, “We should insist that the tone set is serious, measured, considerate and, we hope, confidence-inspiring.”Pressure began to build as the incident became national news. At a meeting on Thursday, angry residents demanded Mr. Copeland’s resignation. In a statement on Friday, David Owen, the town manager, called for Mr. Copeland to step down.“We are hopeful that Mr. Copeland will accede to the public outcry and finally do the right thing and resign from his elected position to save the town any further embarrassment of his making,” Mr. Owen said. He told news media outlets that the Chamber of Commerce had received emails from people vowing to boycott local businesses and cancel summer vacations.Mr. Copeland, who could not be reached for comment, tendered his letter of resignation Sunday evening. The letter said in full, “I resign,” with no expression of apology or regret.