“AMERICAN COOL” is the kind of exhibition many people will find irresistible. This exploration of 100 cultural figures at the National Portrait Gallery in Washington first takes a persona that inspires emulation, and then offers up the avatars in classic celebrity photographs, some by master portraitists like Richard Avedon, Diane Arbus and Henri-Cartier Bresson. And it is the exhibit that keeps on giving. By the time you leave, you’ll have enough material for hours of earnest cocktail party debates over the selection.Although many of the chosen sit at the apex of mainstream pop culture — John Wayne, Madonna, Elvis Presley, Steve Jobs, Frank Sinatra — the curators explain that the modern understanding of cool began with African-American jazzmen and a break-the-rules instinct. The jazz saxophonist Lester Young, the first musician to wear sunglasses while performing in nightclubs, coined and popularized the term in the early 1940s. Forced to live as second-class citizens on the margins of society, blacks were compelled to suppress a boiling rage beneath a mask of nonchalance. In Amiri Baraka’s poem, Young is “the slickster walking through the crowd/surviving on a terrifying wit” in “the jungle the jungle the jungle/ we living in.” Young and those like him adopted a quiet, stylized resistance that came to be identified with cool.Given that this is a museum and that the exhibition is assembled by scholars, the organizers used what they call a “historical rubric” to define the term, laying out the four prerequisites of cool: 1) original artistic vision and signature style; 2) cultural transgression; 3) high-profile recognition; and 4) a cultural legacy. But the curators, Joel Dinerstein, an American studies professor at Tulane University, and Frank H. Goodyear III, co-director of the Bowdoin College Museum of Art and a former curator at the Portrait Gallery, reveal a litany of other significant qualifications and political, geographical and disciplinary biases. Cool figures generally come from working- or middle-class backgrounds. In a secular, democratic society, they argue, cool is a sign of cultural democracy, a status that has to be earned, rather than passed down by an aristocratic elite. Mystery, steely independence, self-possession and confidence also figure into the mix.The obvious cool icons in the exhibit, which runs through Sept. 7, will elicit knowing nods: James Dean, Humphrey Bogart, Jimi Hendrix, Marlon Brando, Bruce Springsteen, Lauren Bacall, Patti Smith, Hunter S. Thompson, Jack Nicholson, Muhammad Ali, Lou Reed, Johnny Cash, Andy Warhol, Steve McQueen, Paul Newman and James Brown.More unexpected is when “American Cool” reaches back to the 19th and early 20th century to recognize those who exemplified the ideal even before there was a word to describe it. Walt Whitman, a radical advocate of self-expression and equality, was the progenitor who created the conditions for cool to be born by exalting personal experience. In the catalog, the curators quote from his 1855 poetry collection “Leaves of Grass”: “And I say to any man or woman,/ Let your soul stand cool and composed/ before a million universes.” As Mr. Dinerstein and Mr. Goodyear explain, for Whitman, “to be cool is to breach the frontier of tradition or consciousness.”Other forebears of cool, some famous, some forgotten, include the escaped slave and statesman Frederick Douglass, described by the suffragist Elizabeth Cady Stanton as “an African prince, conscious of his dignity and power”; Bert Williams, a pioneering black comedian and recording artist who performed in the Ziegfeld Follies; Duke Paoa Kahanamoku, the Hawaiian who turned surfing into a world competitive sport; the painter Georgia O’Keeffe; the jazz singer Bessie Smith; the writer Zora Neale Hurston; and Hollywood celebrities like Greta Garbo, Mae West and Fred Astaire.Mr. Dinerstein and Mr. Goodyear explain that they started with a list of 500 candidates that they whittled down with the help of interviews with students, friends, colleagues and others. Despite protestations that the list is not “our opinion of who’s cool,” it inevitably is. Is Jon Stewart, who is on the list, really cooler than Katharine Hepburn, Sam Cooke, Clark Gable, Gertrude Stein or Norman Mailer, who are not? Perhaps acknowledging the subjective nature of the list and anticipating complaints, the curators included an alternate list of 100 figures to take into account those who didn’t make the first cut. Being cool embraces contradictions. It assumes authenticity and integrity, being comfortable in your own skin. Yet it is also the ultimate performance art, a posture created for the public and disseminated through media.Cool could hardly exist without photography, which facilitated the careful construction of a public identity. Frederick Douglass’s inclusion on the list, Mr. Goodyear writes, was because of his successful exploitation of the new medium in order to create a dignified, strong and refined image to counter racist stereotypes.The camera can as easily be an enemy of cool. Why wasn’t the comedian George Carlin, a cool favorite of the curators, included? Because the curators could not find an appropriate photograph. “We looked at hundreds of George Carlin photos, and in front of the camera he always makes these goofball, ‘class clown’ photos. It just doesn’t work in a photography exhibit,” they explain in Smithsonian Magazine. “We can’t put a goofball up there. It would wreck it.” Oh, but for want of an Annie Leibovitz portrait.While discrimination against blacks helped forge the cool aesthetic, double standards have meant that women were pretty much excluded because classic cool was associated with a capacity for violence, toughness, rebellion and detachment.Indeed, cool embraces dangerous behaviors, most obviously an excess of drugs, alcohol and cigarettes. Bogart, a chain smoker, died of esophageal cancer at 57. Young (age 49), Billie Holiday (44) and Jack Kerouac (47) essentially drank themselves to death. Jimi Hendrix and Jean-Michel Basquiat succumbed to drug overdoses at 27. Others died more violently. James Dean, 24, and Jackson Pollock, 44 and drunk at the time, were killed in car crashes. The 25-year-old rapper Tupac Shakur was gunned down in a drive-by shooting and the rocker Kurt Cobain, 27 and addicted to heroin, killed himself with a shotgun. They lived fast and died young.Early deaths sidestep the problem of changing cultural norms. While Bogey and Dean seem eternally cool, the perception of others like John Wayne changed through the generations. By the 1960s and ’70s, this cool stalwart was seen as a reactionary.The curators explain that their candidates had to maintain their cool cachet for at least a decade. Will some of the more recent members of the cool club, like the hip-hop artist Missy Elliott or the skateboarder Tony Hawk, remain in the top 100 a decade or two from now? Expect debates.After all, arguing over the exhibition is as much a part of the experience as seeing it.