LONDON — The presumption that Sepp Blatter will rule FIFA on his terms for as long as he wants to will, finally, be challenged.With the election for presidency set for next June, not one person within the 209 nations of the Fédération Internationale de Football Association has dared to put his or her name on the ballot.But an outsider, the former French diplomat Jérôme Champagne, confirmed this week that he would run and challenge the way that FIFA governs world soccer.Champagne has nothing to lose, but can he win?His manifesto, written at the start of this year when he first declared himself as a candidate, is primarily aimed at the national soccer associations. They are the power. One nation, one vote, directly elects the president every four years.Champagne talks of making FIFA more receptive to the 209 member associations, more democratic, more in step with changes around the world. He promises them more say — and more sway — in relation to the rich European clubs. He treads lightly, diplomatically, around the issues that should bring down the incumbent president.In fact, Champagne sounds like Blatter when he uses phrases littered with the words “fairness” and “transparency.” We are still awaiting the findings, if they are ever released, from the FIFA independent investigator Michael Garcia after his two-year inquiry into the bids for the 2018 and 2022 World Cups.Most likely, it will indict already ousted members of the FIFA executive committee.Blatter, to use his own analogy, is responsible the way a captain is responsible for steering his ship. But if the presidential election were held right now — rather than in Zurich next June — Blatter would win.He is seen in Africa and other parts of the world as their generous patron. Blatter, like João Havelange before him, ensures that huge handouts from World Cup profits get funneled to every national association. This money — $750,000 to each country, ostensibly for soccer development — is lifeblood to many of the poorer nations. In addition, FIFA devised a so-called “Goal” project to dispense even more cash on an as-needed basis to developing countries.Some of that has resulted in corruption, with money siphoned off into private bank accounts, but that is the way of the world.In a sense, this is cash for votes on a basic level. It was the way that Havelange pried power away from the Englishman Stanley Rous to win the FIFA presidency in 1974. Blatter became Havelange’s trusted lieutenant, and in 1998 his successor.So soccer democracy — built on one nation, one vote — has offered the benefits, and drawbacks, of continuity for 40 years. And as long as Blatter is in good health, he will continue as president after the next vote.There, however, lies Champagne’s opportunity. Blatter will be 79 when the congress meets next June. He is not Superman. Traveling by executive jet might make it easier to handle the stresses of the job, but even that does not make him invulnerable to the inevitable physical and mental changes of aging.Clearly, FIFA is Blatter’s life. He is like many men, unwilling or unable to give up power.Champagne is 56. He was born in Paris, where FIFA was born in 1904. He served in the French embassies or consulates in Oman, Cuba, California and Brazil before joining FIFA for the 1998 World Cup in France.After that, Champagne followed his passion for soccer. He became an ambassador, a kind of diplomatic adviser to Blatter, and served in a variety of roles, including director of international relations for FIFA.Blatter removed Champagne in 2010. Why? It is said inside FIFA circles that Blatter believed that Champagne was building aspirations to succeed him. Champagne denies that was ever the case — until now.He left FIFA, but stayed in Zurich, where the governing body is based.He has built up a consulting business, working on problems involving sport and politics in areas like Kosovo, Israel and Cyprus.Champagne outlined his proposed reforms in 2012, before FIFA got caught in the uproar over how the 2018 World Cup was awarded to Russia and how the 2022 tournament was given to Qatar. The Frenchman published a 26-page, document entitled “What FIFA for the 21st Century?” Between the diplomatic niceties, it was an outline for reform and a challenge to end corruption in the 24-member executive committee.Blatter says the best man to cleanse FIFA of any corruption is himself. While he has not been personally implicated in any wrongdoing so far, he is tainted by the fact that he has been leader during the time that corruption went down.No one thus far has been able to lay a glove on Blatter. It was thought that Michel Platini, a great player for France and now the president of UEFA, would be the obvious candidate to succeed Blatter.However, Platini’s hands are tied. He will seek another term with UEFA next March. And he knows that he could not dislodge the solid bloc support that Havelange, and then Blatter, have received for four decades from the 50-plus African nations.Asia and the Americas can be divided with their votes. Europe will not vote as one in the FIFA election, either.Champagne writes of re-balancing FIFA. “We have to take clear and informed decisions,” he declared, “on whether we want to continue with the current economic polarization, and the sporting imbalances it brings in its wake, or be willing to rebalance the game in our globalized 21st century.”