TUNIS —  The jihadi video out of Syria shows a line of prisoners bound and kneeling in a courtyard surrounded by dozens of civilians and armed men in a noisy hubbub. One man in fatigues paces around, jabbing his arms as he issues orders. Eventually, a burly fighter in loose, dark clothes shoots each of the half-dozen prisoners in the back of the head.Though a black balaclava obscured the face of the man giving orders, investigators were able to identify him by the neck brace he was wearing and passed his name to the police in his home country: Tunisia.While Western governments have been keeping a close eye on the possible radicalization of their own citizens, the greater threat by far, analysts warn, is for Arab countries like Tunisia, in transition from autocracy and struggling to deal with incipient terrorism.For a country of only 11 million people, Tunisia has supplied a disproportionate number of fighters to the Islamist cause in Iraq and Syria. At least 12,000 foreigners have joined Islamist groups in Syria to fight against the government of President Bashar al-Assad, and as many as 3,000 of them are Tunisians, the Soufan Group, a New York-based organization that conducts security analysis, said in a report released in June.The great majority of the foreign fighters in Syria are from Arab countries — only a fifth come from Western countries — and most have now joined the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, an extremist Islamist group, the report says.The man in the neck brace is a striking example of the threat. He is known as Abu Jihad and is a member of the military police of ISIS, an enforcer in an organization notorious for its propensity for violence. The Spanish counterterrorism police have photos of him, showing a man around 30 years old, wearing a pakul, a traditional wool cap worn in Afghanistan, and posing by a jeep with “ISIS military police” painted on the hood.Eventually, Tunisian security officials fear, he will return to Tunisia determined to pursue the same goals there that he fought for in Syria and Iraq as a member of ISIS.In the first act of the Arab Spring, Tunisians rose up against police brutality and the stifling corruption of the government of Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, forcing him to flee. At first, the country seemed to be making a successful transition from authoritarianism, introducing a multiparty democracy, but deep political divisions soon threatened to tear the country apart.An Islamist party, Ennahda, won elections and formed a coalition government, and secular and left-wing parties campaigned bitterly against it. They accused the government of being soft on Islamist militancy and allowing Islamic extremists to take over mosques and intimidate people with vigilante groups.Tunisians have been drawn to jihad since the 1980s, when the international jihad movement was formed in opposition to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. One of the leading figures has been Seifallah Ben Hussein, better known as Abu Iyadh, a veteran of the war against the Soviets in Afghanistan, who trained and fought there into the late 1980s. By the time of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, he had become one of the top 10 or 12 lieutenants to leaders of Al Qaeda.It was Abu Iyadh who supplied the two Tunisian suicide bombers who assassinated a renowned Afghan commander, Ahmed Shah Massoud, two days before the Sept. 11 attacks in order to remove the greatest obstacle to Taliban rule in Afghanistan. Abu Iyadh fought alongside Osama bin Laden at Tora Bora, Afghanistan, in December 2001, before they both escaped through the mountains to Pakistan.He later made his way to Turkey, where he was arrested in 2003, extradited to Tunisia and imprisoned by the Ben Ali government, which was rigidly anti-Islamist. He was released along with thousands of other Islamist and political prisoners under an amnesty after the revolution in 2011.Commentators at first suggested that the democratic ideals of the Arab Spring had dealt a perhaps fatal blow to Al Qaeda and the entire jihad movement, but that was premature. As soon as he emerged from prison, Abu Iyadh founded the movement Ansar al-Shariah in Tunisia in April 2011. Within a year, he had drawn 30,000 to 40,000 youthful followers.His movement, with its emphasis on religion, charitable work in the community and supporting jihad in foreign lands, appealed to Tunisians suddenly freed from dictatorship and forced secularity. Abu Iyadh was a Che Guevara figure to them, said Fabio Merone, a doctoral student studying the movement.But his opposition to democracy and his belief in violence as a tactic soon re-emerged. Three days after the attack on the United States Mission in Benghazi, Libya, he staged a similar action against the United States Embassy compound in Tunis, burning 100 cars in the parking lot and looting the American school next to the embassy. After two left-wing politicians were assassinated by Abu Iyadh’s followers, Ansar al-Shariah was declared a terrorist organization.That was in August 2013. Since then Abu Iyadh has been on the run, and now the police say he is in Libya. Many of his followers have been rounded up and imprisoned in a police crackdown.The influential ideologues of the movement — among them Khattab Idriss, who runs a mosque in the town of Sidi Bouzid, and Seifeddine Rais, the charismatic young spokesman of Ansar al-Shariah — have evaded arrest but fallen silent.Their followers are buckling under the heavy hand of the Tunisian police.Families in the working-class neighborhood of Dawhar Hisher in the capital, Tunis, complain of house raids, phones being tapped and the arrest of relatives of suspects.Members of Ansar al-Shariah say that they are harassed by the police and government officials and that they cannot find jobs, or even a ride on intercity buses, because of their long beards. Some say they shaved their beards after warnings from the police.Others have left the country for military training camps in Libya and, after that, for Syria. Of the several thousand who have been fighting in Syria, about 400 have returned.Most of them, trying to recover from the experience, are more “traumatized” than anything, according to one Western official.The fear, however, is that some pose dangers. “You learn to kill,” said one Spanish investigator. “That’s what you get from radicalization, and they enhance that in the training camps. It’s the cruelty of the act that distorts.”