Mayor Bill de Blasio gave an unannounced speech at a Manhattan gala of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, the leading pro-Israel lobbying group, assuring its members that “part of my job description is to be a defender of Israel.”The appearance, at the New York Hilton in Midtown on Thursday night, was not listed on the mayor’s public schedule, and a reporter who tried to attend was escorted away by the security staff.The seemingly secretive nature of Mr. de Blasio’s appearance led to questions on Friday about the transparency of his young administration, especially given his repeated pledges during last year’s campaign to oversee a more open and inclusive City Hall than that of his predecessor, Michael R. Bloomberg.Mr. de Blasio, facing sharp inquiries from reporters on Friday, offered a measured mea culpa, saying he would urge aides to be more careful to inform the public about his whereabouts.“We do owe you a clear understanding of where I am and what I’m doing,” he said at a news conference in the Blue Room at City Hall.The mayor noted that the organizers of the event had requested that no journalists be allowed to attend.He said that “in many cases” he would make his remarks available to the public in instances where the news media was not given access.“I’m not going to say every case,” Mr. de Blasio said, “because there could be some particular dynamic that would make that wrong.”“We want to make sure that we’re as transparent as possible,” the mayor added.Many New York politicians speak at the annual gatherings of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, or Aipac, and in the past Mr. de Blasio has not been shy about expressing support for Israel.Still, some New Yorkers in his liberal base are not as sympathetic to the Israeli cause. And the conspicuous omission of the mayor’s appearance from his schedule prompted Gawker, a cheeky blog, to publish a headline that read, “Reporter Kicked Out of Bill de Blasio’s Secret Pro-Israel Speech.”In the speech, which was reported first by the website Capital New York, Mr. de Blasio said the lobby would always have “a friend and ally at City Hall.”The commitment to defend Israel is “elemental to being an American, because there is no greater ally on earth,” he said.Capital New York also posted audio excerpts from the mayor’s remarks online.Mr. de Blasio said New York City had a special bond with Israel not only because of its large Jewish population, but also because of shared values of democracy and open discourse, and the shared experience of confronting terrorism.“We take inspiration from Israel for how it has stared down terrorism and kept moving forward,” he said.Mr. de Blasio said he had visited Israel three times, most recently with his wife and son. He said he was especially moved by visiting Sderot, a city in the Negev desert near the Gaza Strip that has been the target of rocket attacks.“We went to the children’s center in Sderot,” Mr. de Blasio said, “and we saw what it meant for everyday families. If they wanted to have time for their kids to play, they have to be in a missileproof, bombproof play area, because you could not know otherwise if your children would be safe.“You can’t have an experience like that and not feel solidarity with the people of Israel and know that they’re on the front line of fighting against so many challenges.”As the city’s public advocate from 2010 to 2013, Mr. de Blasio, who was raised a Roman Catholic, was a staunch defender of Israel, accusing Saudi Airlines of discriminating against Israeli citizens and criticizing companies that do business with Iran.Mr. de Blasio assured Aipac members “that City Hall will always be open to Aipac,” adding, “When you need me to stand by you in Washington or anywhere, I will answer the call, and I will answer it happily, because that’s my job.”