Josh Shields, a corporate pilot, spends 180 days a year flying around the world, often to Asia and Europe. He carries two laptops, an iPad and two iPhones — all of which, he realizes, are vulnerable to data breaches.For protection, he installs a virtual private network and disk encryption software, avoids doing any banking while on the road and limits himself to one email account.Call him paranoid, but he sees it as being realistic.“If you’re traveling, be smart about what you are doing,” said Mr. Shields, a 36-year-old Illinois resident, who flies executives throughout the United States, Asia and Europe. Public Wi-Fi accounts that do not require a password — whether they are in a hotel room or lobby, coffee shop or an airport — are particularly vulnerable.“If you’re looking at something, theoretically, everyone else can be, too,” he said.Security experts agree that you cannot be too careful. If you are reading your next presentation in an airplane seat, someone sitting behind you may be, too.If you are carrying confidential files on your hard drive, they are vulnerable. And if you type a password into your mobile phone, someone may be capturing those keystrokes.Security and privacy issues fall into two main categories: those concerning data stored on a computer, and those related to information — emails, attachments — that are sent from and received at a computer. In either form, the data can be vulnerable. But travelers can take some simple steps to reduce the risks.TAKE ONLY WHAT YOU NEED The safest way to protect confidential information is to leave it at home. But if you must take it, carry the data on a memory stick. The more separation from a computer’s hard drive, the better, experts say.As for the computer itself, do not use your regular one. Instead, “take a loaner laptop, a temporary laptop,” said Joseph Lorenzo Hall, chief technologist at the Center for Democracy and Technology, an advocacy group for global online civil liberties. And when you return, especially from places like China or Russia, which have higher rates of hacking, “wipe it before you connect it to your network or home or anything you care about,” Mr. Hall said.USE ENCRYPTION If you carry your laptop, rely on disk encryption to protect electronic files. Before you travel, you or your company’s information technology expert can install disk encryption software on your devices. If the entire hard drive is encrypted, a thief “would get total gibberish,” Mr. Hall said.On websites, “https://” at the beginning of the address indicates a site is encrypted, but it must be on each page to prevent vulnerability, according to the Federal Trade Commission.INSTALL A VIRTUAL PRIVATE NETWORK To protect the data that flows into and out of a laptop, iPad or iPhone, international travelers like Mr. Shields install a virtual private network.“Internationally it allows me to connect to websites that some countries block,” he said. “China is a big one. A lot of U.S. websites are blocked when you are traveling in China — Facebook, Yahoo, Google.”Recently he has used WiTopia, a V.P.N. that protects data in transit from one computer, mobile phone or tablet to another by encrypting it. Bill Bullock, chief executive of WiTopia, a personal privacy and data security services company based in Reston, Va., said, “Your data is not secure in the lobby of a hotel, in an airport, in a hotel room.”GO FOR LAYERS When it comes to security, Gary A. Oster, an executive with the United States Travel Association, relies on layers to protect himself from digital thieves. These include a black jacket, with zip-off sleeves and a hood, that has pockets that block RFID — radio-frequency identification — he said. He also uses Dropbox to send files, and an iPhone 5S with a fingerprint sensor to confirm identity and the ability to create a personal hot spot.Mr. Oster, who travels five to 10 days a month on business within the United States, wants to protect his credit cards as well as data on his devices. “I travel as light as possible — light, connected and fully rechargeable,” he said. “I am a paperless guy.”PREPARE FOR THE WORST In certain places like China, expect that your data may be observed by potential adversaries, said Jules Polonetsky, executive director and co-chairman of the Future of Privacy Forum, a think tank that promotes responsible data practices.THINK LOW-TECH To prevent a thief from turning on a camera or microphone, place a sticker over it. “It’s the low-tech solution for a high-tech problem,” said Michelle Dennedy, vice president and chief privacy officer at McAfee, a security technology company. To prevent over-the-shoulder snooping, use a privacy screen.These guidelines are not foolproof, but security experts say every measure can help reduce the chances of cybertheft.“There are no absolute remedies,” said William Evanina, national counterintelligence executive at the Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, a government agency.“Know what your competitors would want from you.” he said, and aim to safeguard it by leaving that information at home.