LVIV, Ukraine —  Under a leaden sky that wept intermittent rain, this fiercely proud city bade farewell on Saturday to one of its sons, a 28-year-old university lecturer killed by a bullet on Thursday in Kiev in the carnage on and around Independence Square.More than 1,000 people crowded into one of this town’s many imposing Baroque-era churches to bid an emotional farewell to the man, Bohdan Solchanyk, a lecturer of modern history mourned by hundreds of weeping students and other young people, by elderly women, trimly dressed academics and intellectuals.The polyphonic chants of six black-robed choristers, a small mountain of flowers, a brief address by the president of the university where Mr. Solchanyk taught and, above all, patriotic and partisan songs in the street outside after the funeral rendered the Ukrainian Greek Catholic service a display of the spirit that has long sustained the distinct nature of western Ukraine.Lviv, with a population of 800,000 and its cobblestoned streets and rich array of architecture reflecting centuries of Polish, Hapsburg or Russian rule, has long been a center for the Ukrainian Greek Catholic rite, which is central to the National Catholic University here, where Mr. Solchanyk taught modern history.“He wasn’t really a political activist,” said Pavlo Salo, 27, a graduate of the university who now works at an academic publishing house in Lviv. “He was of a high intellect with a higher education, the sort of person who asks, fundamentally, ‘Who are we, and what are we doing here?’ ”Mr. Salo and Mr. Solchanyk were together just off Independence Square, called Maidan here, on Thursday when they became separated. Mr. Salo called his friend’s cellphone repeatedly. There was no answer. Eventually he and a third friend found Mr. Solchanyk’s body, one of 11 or 12 piled near a McDonald’s on Maidan.Mr. Salo said he could see that Mr. Solchanyk’s fiancée, Marysha, had called the cellphone 17 times. He braced himself before calling Mr. Solchanyk’s parents, and then Marysha, “who is like a sister to me,” Mr. Salo said.“I want to emphasize: he had only a shield,” Mr. Salo said in an interview hours after the funeral. “He was trying to defend others. He had on a ski helmet and nothing in his hands.”Mr. Salo had returned to Lviv on Saturday morning, accompanying buses with the bodies of the 13 people from this region who had been in the Kiev mayhem.About 2,000 residents of Lviv gathered late Friday and into the early hours of Saturday to mourn the dead.Mr. Solchanyk will be buried near his parents’ home, about 75 miles outside Lviv, on Sunday, Mr. Salo said.The two friends were among hundreds, if not thousands, of people from this region who have constantly answered the call to the Maidan. Mr. Solchanyk was on at least his third trip in the past 10 weeks, said Mr. Salo, who was on his fifth. A distant cousin of Mr. Solchanyk’s, who identified herself as Natalia Ignatieva, 50, said they were all seeking what she called “a normal life in a democratic country.”“The thought of leaving here, that is not even an option for us,” Mr. Salo said of himself and his friends. And he insistently denied any suggestion that Mr. Solchanyk — or his friends — were aggressive. “We didn’t sign up for any ‘hundreds,’ ” he said, referring to the units organized by some of the more militant protesters on Maidan.As Mr. Salo spoke in a cafe, Ukraine’s various television channels were giving the latest in a confusing series of reports about the possible whereabouts and status of President Victor F. Yanukovych.Although Lviv and western Ukraine have a long history highly distinct from the eastern parts of this large country of 46 million, very few people here are calling openly for Ukraine to split. Instead, they emphasize, the country must stick together, but as a beacon of democracy that adheres to the rule of law, not under the kind of corrupt government they say they have endured under various presidents since independence in 1991.The bloodshed of the past week has deeply shocked Ukrainians, who are experiencing wild mood swings amid a torrent of contradictory reports and emotions.Yuri Matsoula, 28, works at a local television station and knew Mr. Solchanyk as a fascinating lecturer who delved into the Stalinist period but was also an expert on local voting patterns.When first interviewed on Friday evening, Mr. Matsoula was talkative and expressed confidence that the violence of the previous days would not resume.By Saturday, at the service, he simply turned away in grief when approached. Tears rolled down the cheeks of many, their sorrow spliced only with defiant applause for the dead man as his coffin was loaded into a van and his parents, Zinoviy and Oksana, and younger brother Stepan followed the cortege.“Glory to Ukraine!” the crowd shouted, repeating the now familiar refrain. “To the heroes, glory! Heroes don’t die!”