YANGON, Myanmar —  Secretary of State John Kerry called on Myanmar’s leaders on Sunday to move ahead with fundamental reforms amid concerns that the nation is stumbling on its path to democracy.“Is everything hunky-dory? No, not yet. Absolutely not,” Mr. Kerry said. “There are still things that need to be done.”But Mr. Kerry, who visited Myanmar as a senator in 1999, sent positive signals about Washington’s once chilly relations with Myanmar. He said that the country had made significant progress over the years and that the Obama administration would continue to work with the government to encourage political and legal reforms.The leaders he met with, he said, “expressed willingness and a readiness to continue to do that.”The secretary of state, who was on the final day of a two-day visit to the country for regional meetings with his counterparts from Asian nations, met on Sunday evening in Yangon with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel laureate and opposition leader. American officials said Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi had noted continuing concerns about the prospects for political reform in a country where former military rulers still dominated the system.The day before, Mr. Kerry met with President Thein Sein of Myanmar and with Thura Shwe Mann, the speaker of the lower house of Parliament. Mr. Shwe Mann visited Washington last year with other lawmakers in one of many signs of the warming ties between the countries.The White House has been quick to cast Myanmar’s movement toward democracy in recent years as a foreign-policy success. During a May speech at the United States Military Academy at West Point, President Obama, who visited the country in 2012, said political reforms there were the result of “American leadership.”But American officials say the most fundamental political and legal changes have yet to be made. Myanmar’s military continues to hold a quarter of the seats in Parliament. The Constitution has been written to preclude Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi from becoming president.And there are concerns that the government, which took power three years ago after five decades of military dictatorship, is backsliding on media freedoms. Five journalists were recently convicted of divulging state secrets and sentenced to 10 years of prison with hard labor after publishing a disputed article on a weapons factory.Myanmar’s state media gave prominence to Mr. Kerry’s visit and offered an upbeat assessment of the country’s relations with the United States. But the privately owned media, which have been feisty since censorship was abolished two years ago, criticized Mr. Kerry as being too soft on the Thein Sein administration.“We now feel we have been deceived in this so-called reform process,” U Than Htut Aung, the founder and head of Eleven Media, one of the country’s largest private media companies, said in an interview. “If the United States does not put enough pressure on Myanmar, media freedoms could be in danger and the 2015 elections might not be free and fair.”Mr. Thein Sein and the governing party are bracing for tough elections next year, the first time since 1990 that they will compete against Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi and her allies in a nationwide vote.“Next year’s election,” Mr. Kerry said, “will absolutely be a benchmark moment for the whole world to be able to assess the direction that Burma is moving in.”Visits by American leaders attracted high levels of attention in recent years because they symbolized the country’s openness after years of cloistered and paranoid rule by a military junta. But Myanmar’s public has become inured and did not pay much attention to Mr. Kerry’s visit, said U Yan Myo Thein, a prominent commentator on politics.“Their lives didn’t benefit very much after the visits of previous American leaders,” he said. “And living standards have not improved much during the reform process.”The détente between Myanmar and the United States over the past several years has been part of what leaders in both countries describe as separate but parallel geopolitical pivots. The United States says it is seeking to focus more on its Asian relations, while Myanmar, which for years had a close alliance and economic partnership with China, is courting the West for investment and for an opportunity to shed its image as a pariah nation.Aides to Mr. Kerry said he had raised concerns over the treatment of the country’s Muslim Rohingya minority, who have been the target of attacks by radical Buddhists and are living without citizenship and in squalor along the border with Bangladesh.China and a number of other countries have overlapping claims in the region’s waters, and Mr. Kerry asserted that progress had been made in trying to defuse the dispute over the South China Sea.During a meeting with members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, Mr. Kerry repeated the United States’ call for a freeze of activities that “would complicate or escalate disputes.” But the final statement from the meeting had no specific mention of China.A senior Obama administration official insisted nonetheless that Asean countries’ concern over China’s maritime actions was at an “all-time high.”