WASHINGTON —  When President Obama summoned his closest advisers to the Oval Office a year ago this week to tell them he was holding off on a missile strike against Syria, one of his arguments was that if he acted without Congress, he might not get congressional backing for military intervention the next time he needed it.“He can’t make these decisions divorced from the American public and from Congress,” a senior aide said at the time. “Who knows what we’re going to face in the next three and a half years in the Middle East?”Now, Mr. Obama knows what he is facing — rampaging Sunni militants who beheaded an American and have declared an Islamic caliphate across a swath of Iraq and Syria. But as the president considers airstrikes in Syria against the group, known as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, seeking a congressional imprimatur remains a politically tricky undertaking.It is not just that many Democrats and even some Republicans are wary about endorsing a new American military venture. The White House is also wrestling with how to define the president’s war-making authority in a way that does not undermine his claim last year that he had finally taken the United States off a permanent war footing.A broad authorization — like those passed after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and before the Iraq war — would carry echoes of the George W. Bush administration, outrage Mr. Obama’s antiwar liberal base and raise the specter of an open-ended conflict in Syria.“For the White House, the bottom line is tailoring legal authority to match the policy objectives it shares with Congress and our allies,” said Harold H. Koh, a professor of international law at Yale. “The problem is those policy objectives vary from place to place.”Mr. Koh, who as the State Department’s legal adviser in 2011 defended the White House decision to bypass Congress before the bombing campaign in Libya, said the case for military action against ISIS in Iraq was fairly straightforward. In addition to the threat the militants pose to Americans, they could destroy Iraq’s effort to form a viable government, which is a major diplomatic priority of the United States.In Syria, however, three years of sectarian civil war have made the situation far more difficult. The United States has called for the ouster of President Bashar al-Assad, yet targeting ISIS there could help Mr. Assad since he is also at war with the group. His foreign minister has suggested joining forces with the United States against the militants.At the White House on Thursday, Mr. Obama justified the airstrikes he had ordered in Iraq, saying, “It is not just part of my responsibility, but it is a sacred duty for me as commander in chief to protect the American people.” That is a blanket authority that lawmakers would be loath to give him for any extended campaign in Syria.White House officials said its lawyers were exploring whether the 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force could be retrofitted to justify strikes against ISIS in Iraq. The measure empowered Mr. Bush to mount the global war on terrorism, and Mr. Obama has invoked it to carry out drone and missile strikes in Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia.“I do think that it’ll be important for Congress to weigh in,” Mr. Obama said of possible action in Syria. “But I don’t want to put the cart before the horse. We don’t have a strategy yet.”Indeed, the president could decide not to petition Congress for approval at all before the November midterm elections. That would relieve some lawmakers, who do not want to cast a politically unpopular vote and then face their war-weary constituents.Bypassing Congress would be difficult to justify, however, given the fervent case Mr. Obama made for consulting lawmakers last September. After laying out the moral and legal reasons for striking Mr. Assad, who American officials say gassed his own people, Mr. Obama said, “I’m also mindful that I’m the president of the world’s oldest constitutional democracy.”A growing number of voices in Congress are also demanding a say. On Wednesday, a bipartisan group of lawmakers wrote to John A. Boehner, the speaker of the House, to urge him to hold a vote, saying Mr. Obama’s strikes “appear to be beyond the scope” of the mission he laid out.Two Democratic senators, Tim Kaine of Virginia and Chris Murphy of Connecticut, said they did not believe that any of the existing war authorizations give Mr. Obama the authority to conduct a long-term campaign against ISIS in Iraq and Syria. And Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee, the ranking member on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said Congress needed to “own” any potential military action.Of course, when the president turned to Congress a year ago to approve his military action, he faced crushing defeat. So he seized on a Russian diplomatic proposal to pressure Mr. Assad to give up his chemical weapons stockpile. In a bitter irony for Mr. Obama, that move — a diplomatic Hail Mary pass — ended up being one of his few foreign policy successes.This time, winning some kind of congressional approval for military action should not be as hard. Images of the American journalist James Foley with a hooded ISIS fighter holding a knife to his throat have brought home the threat to the United States in a way that images of Syrians gasping from sarin gas attacks did not.If the authorization is drafted narrowly enough — limiting military action to Iraq and Syria, ruling out any ground troops and placing a time limit on the operation — Mr. Obama could claim that it enshrines, rather than undercuts, his vision of a counterterrorism policy for the post-9/11 era.Such an authorization, said Jack Goldsmith, a Harvard law professor who served in the Bush administration and has written extensively about this debate, could be a political victory for Mr. Obama, giving him much-needed backing for a long, potentially arduous military campaign.“It doesn’t guarantee him a political blank check,” Mr. Goldsmith said in an interview, “but it gives him so much more political legitimacy and cover in case things go wrong.”