It began with the best intentions.When Casual Friday spread throughout the corporate workplace in the early 1990s, hip-to-the-jive bosses took their cues from the relaxed dress codes of Silicon Valley and offered employees a semi-reprieve from Gordon Gekko 1980s power suits. But it all quickly dissolved into sartorial confusion.“The problem with Casual Friday is that there were no parameters and it didn’t mean anything,” said Bill Cournoyer, vice president and men’s wear divisional merchandise manager at Bergdorf Goodman in New York. “So somewhere in the mid-90s the term ‘smart casual’ emerged.”Of course, smart casual is a term ripe with subjectivity and, anecdotally, it is the dress code most men truly fear.Even the designers are confused.“If I’m honest, I’m not even sure what smart casual means,” said Lucas Ossendrijver, head of men’s wear at Lanvin. “I love the word smart, but I hate the word casual. It is often an excuse for men not to make any effort at all.”For some men, the only bow to smart casual is ditching their ties; for others, it means khakis and sneakers.“At root, a smart casual dress code is merely a request that men do better than wearing sweat pants and sportswear — it sets the bar low!” said Mansel Fletcher, features editor for the website Mr. Porter.However, smart casual seems to be inescapable. It was Prince William’s dress code of choice when he greeted the press with his newborn son; it was the official dress code of the 2013 Group of 8 summit meeting in Northern Ireland; and it is the go-to for countless scenarios, from country weddings to client drinks to cruise ship buffets.The issue remains that every industry, event and location heaps the dress code with nuances; which perhaps explains why the fix-all solution of baggy chinos and a loose-fitting oxford shirt is tempting.Jason Basmajian, creative director at the British tailor Gieves & Hawkes, is a Boston-born designer who cut his tailoring chops at Brioni, Calvin Klein and Donna Karan. Given his globe-trotting resume, he is well versed in regional variations.“Attitudes are still cultural,” he said. “In America, which is where it originated, smart casual is about accessibility and democracy, whereas Europeans, especially the Italians and the English, are much more strict about the cut.”For Mr. Basmajian, the Italians provide the blueprint.“They adopted the country wardrobes of the English aristocrat,” he said, “but made it sexier with a better cut, finish and styling.”Giorgio Armani, the man who replaced the confines of the traditional Savile Row suit and introduced a notion of fluidity to men’s tailoring, is an authority on the subject. He advocates the idea of achieving “natural harmony” that still leans towards smart. “It is important to focus on comfort, especially when dressing casually,” he said. “However, there is also an elegant way of being comfortable. An overly casual look should be avoided.”Much has been written about the resurgence of men’s wear. According to the management consulting firm Bain & Co., the luxury men’s wear market makes up 40 percent of the international luxury market, estimated to be worth €217 billion in 2013, and its growth is outperforming women’s wear in almost every region.Mr. Basmajian said this increased demand had sharpened modern interpretations of smart casual.“The elevation of men looking good started with a renewed interesting in tailoring,” he said, “and now men want to put as much consideration into their casual wardrobe; the chino thing was too limiting.”The desire to take on this bête noire of men’s wear was apparent at the autumn 2014 edition of men’s wear shows in London, where many Savile Row stalwarts gave themselves a stern dressing down. While impeccable business two-pieces and dinner suits were still evident, it was a casual mood that pervaded at venerable tailors like Hardy Amies and Gieves & Hawkes.“Done well, smart casual lends itself to more than one specific requirement, which is essential to our clients’ sped-up lifestyles,” said Mehmet Ali, design director at Hardy Amies.During the shows last week, Hardy Amies presented a mix and match of traditional tailored pieces in somber tones with jazzy casual trousers, boxy sports jackets and chunky roll necks. There were even jeans.“Smart casual is still about a great fit,” Mr. Ali said. “It’s just that tailored pieces are slightly less structured with less padding at the shoulder. If you go for looser fits, then you don’t look smart enough.”The trick, he said, is to think of smart casual as neither a contradiction nor a murky middle ground but as a balance between smart and casual pieces that can be tweaked and assembled to an individual situation.Smart casual lost its way when it became reduced to a sloppy uniform. Today, it is just as much about fit, materials, and construction as its formal counterpart.“Start smart and then take it down a notch with more casual pieces,” said Mr. Cournoyer, the Bergdorf Goodman executive. “That’s why having some kind of well-tailored jacket in your wardrobe is a good place to start.”Elisabetta Canali, third generation of the Italian family behind Canali, said, “Smart casual has become more instinctive, but I would say that it’s safer to err on smart as there are no precise rules.”Ms. Canali, now the brand’s communications director, believes it is the details that make the difference.“Shoes and belts need to match,” she said, “while the pocket square and tie, for example, do not.”Men’s wear tends to respect, and even relish, boundaries. There are specific elements in a man’s wardrobe that are rarely challenged: the jacket, the shirt, the trouser and the T-shirt. But perhaps this is not surprising, given that most modern styles are derivations of equestrian, work and military uniforms.The trick is in understanding how to shuffle the pack of familiar touchstones and make it personal, said Mr. Ossendrijver, the Lanvin executive.“It’s not longer about conforming,” he said. “In fact the biggest mistake a man can make with smart casual is simply not trying.”