WASHINGTON —  With a public corruption investigation hanging over him, Senator Robert Menendez suggested Tuesday that Cuban spies had planted the seeds of that inquiry as a way to discredit him and mute his strident opposition to the government in Havana.Mr. Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey, used that hint of Cold War intrigue to cast the investigation against him as tainted by espionage and international politics. His lawyers wrote a letter to the Justice Department in April asking prosecutors to investigate the Cuba connection.“It should be pretty appalling that a foreign government would be engaged in trying to affect an election or the position of a United States senator,” Mr. Menendez said in an interview with CNN. “And if that can happen, then I think there are real consequences for our democracy.”His comments followed a Washington Post article that said that a 2013 C.I.A. report had cited credible evidence linking Cuban agents to a campaign to smear Mr. Menendez. One senior United States official said Tuesday that the government had no proof that the Cuban government was behind the effort. A second official said that although it was a possibility, the authorities had not substantiated it.A message left at the Cuban Interests Section in Washington was not returned.The Justice Department is continuing its corruption investigation of the senator without interruption. The F.B.I. is investigating whether he received free airplane rides and other perks from a wealthy donor and repaid him with political favorsEven if Mr. Menendez’s Cuba theory is correct, it is unlikely to derail the inquiry. As a public-relations strategy, though, Mr. Menendez’s accusations could cast him as a victim in a case born out of international gamesmanship.The investigation began with a tip that a political benefactor, Dr. Salomon E. Melgen, had helped pay for under-age prostitutes for Mr. Menendez in the Dominican Republic. The tipster, who identified himself as Peter Williams, exchanged emails with the F.B.I. but refused to meet agents in person.As the 2012 elections approached, somebody brought those emails to The Daily Caller, a conservative website, which published them and interviewed two women who said Mr. Menendez had paid them for sex.Whether or not Mr. Menendez’s support of tough sanctions against Cuba and his seat at the helm of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee made him a target of Cuban operatives, his role as a prominent Democrat and fund-raiser had unquestionably made him a focus for Republican opposition researchers.Working in Washington’s Virginia suburbs, they built files on Mr. Menendez with the goal of bringing him down. Researchers turned up evidence that Mr. Menendez had intervened with the Commerce and State Departments in ways that helped Dr. Melgen.The women who made the accusations against Mr. Menendez ultimately recanted. The F.B.I. investigation then shifted to his relationship with Dr. Melgen and whether he traded gifts for official favors. Federal agents raided Dr. Melgen’s offices in South Florida. Mr. Menendez has denied doing anything improper.“Let’s remember how this all started: nameless, faceless accusations that ultimately proved themselves to be false,” Mr. Menendez said Tuesday. “Early on, there were some indications about the possibility of the Cuban government’s involvement.”He did not say what those indications were. In January, Mr. Menendez’s lawyers sent a letter to the Justice Department, asking for an investigation into who was behind the original accusations. That letter, according to someone who has seen it, did not raise the possibility of Cuban involvement. It included the Internet addresses behind the original emails and asked the government to trace them.The lawyers sent a second letter in April, this time raising the possibility that the Cuban government was involved. Mr. Menendez, in his remarks to CNN and in a statement released by his office, brought up the Post story as evidence of Cuban involvement and said, “I wouldn’t be surprised that the regime would do anything it can to stop me.”