HONG KONG — The Hong Kong government moved to clear pro-democracy protesters from a small area in front of an office building on Tuesday morning in the first move against the demonstrators in weeks. The authorities met no resistance, with student protesters saying they would not oppose the court order.Dozens of bailiffs wearing black vests, backed by the police, supervised the removal of barricades in a small section of the main protest area around the Citic Tower after reading aloud a court injunction. They took hours to methodically clear metal barriers and the random items left from protesters who had been living there in tents for weeks, from books to undergarments.The operation’s timing was no surprise; it was announced ahead of time. Demonstrators had largely vacated the area, and the police, unlike in past operations against the movement, did not wear riot gear.“The majority of us don’t want to violate what they claim to be the law,” said one protester, Chris Wong, a student from Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Yet even without court injunctions, he said, the time had come for the movement to consider its next phase.“The major thing we have done is arouse the attention of everyone,” he said outside his blue and orange one-man tent. “Ideally, we should stay until we get true democracy, but that doesn’t seem really possible. Staying here should be the means, not the ends.”The court-mandated operation, applying to only a limited area, was unlike previous police efforts to clear broader areas. Those efforts, most recently a month ago, backfired, infuriating demonstrators and drawing thousands more people out on to the streets.Demonstrators have blocked streets around Hong Kong’s main government buildings since Sept. 28, when the police tried to quell student-led protests with tear gas and pepper spray.Tuesday’s clearance covered only a small sliver of the occupied area, but was the first attempt in weeks to shrink the barricaded camps that protesters had built in an effort to force the local authorities and Chinese Communist Party leaders in Beijing to heed their demands for free elections for Hong Kong’s top leader, the chief executive.An Aug. 31 ruling by China’s legislature set strict guidelines on how candidates could win a spot on the ballot that demonstrators say guarantees that only people backed by Beijing can run for office. Hong Kong, a former British colony, has been run as a semiautonomous region of China since 1997.Acting on a complaint from the building’s owner, a Hong Kong court issued an injunction this month against blocking traffic to the Citic Tower. The tower, an office and retail building, is across the street from the government headquarters on the south side of Victoria Harbor in an area known as Admiralty. On Tuesday the area immediately in front of the building was cleared, but the operation was very limited, succeeding in opening up a parking garage underneath the building. The barricades were simply moved a few feet to the south, closer to the main protest site on Harcourt Road.The court issued a similar injunction for a street in Mong Kok, another protest site on the north side of the harbor that is usually thronged by Chinese tourists, after a taxi drivers’ association and a minibus company brought complaints. The government warned that anyone obstructing the police could be culpable of “criminal contempt of court.”It did not say when the police might try to enforce the injunction in Mong Kok, an area where rowdy protests have sometimes flared into violent clashes.Balzac Lam Yin-tung, a student studying education, said most, if not all, protesters outside the Citic Tower were resigned to retreating, as long as the police did not try to remove the newly reinforced barriers guarding the main protest camp.“We should stay in Admiralty until the government responds,” she said as she put protest stickers on books, bottles and other belongings she planned to leave for the bailiffs. “People won’t leave Admiralty until we get a real plan, a plan for real universal suffrage.”A person involved in the Hong Kong government’s decision said the police would not rush to completely clear the three occupied areas, although the closing of major avenues had caused traffic jams and hurt sales in stores. The person insisted on anonymity, because he was not authorized to speak openly about the matter.“The government is in no hurry to end the whole thing because public opinion is growing on our side,” he said. “It will be guerrilla warfare — we will clear it, they will regroup, we will clear it again, they will regroup, but eventually they will dissipate.”