LONDON —  The Queen is dead. Charles, paranoid and power obsessed, dissolves Parliament and parks a tank outside Buckingham Palace. While Prince William dithers, his steely and pragmatic wife, Kate, orchestrates a palace coup to save the monarchy and prevent Britain from sliding into civil war.So goes the audacious plot of “King Charles III,” a new play by Mike Bartlett, which opened here last week at the Almeida Theater to glowing, if somewhat scandalized, reviews. The critic for The New Statesman called it the “boldest and most provocative play about the royal family in British theatrical history,” adding, “If the Lord Chamberlain still policed the stage, Bartlett would be in the Tower,” a reference to the royal official who had the power to censor plays until 1968.Advertisements for the play — showing the real Prince Charles dressed for his coronation — were barred from the London Underground until the image of the prince’s face was heavily pixelated. Most advance tickets have already sold out, but more will be released on the day of each performance. “I suspect people will be camping out on the streets,” said a critic from The Telegraph. Written in iambic pentameter, modeled on Shakespearean histories like “Richard II” but set in the near future, the play explores what might happen if a British monarch bucked centuries of tradition and refused to rubber-stamp the will of Parliament. In the process, Mr. Bartlett imagines Queen Elizabeth’s funeral; Diana, Princess of Wales, as a ghost; and Prince Harry running off with a grungy art student he meets at the London nightclub Boujis. She takes him to Dans le Noir, a London restaurant where patrons eat in the dark, and there he is mistaken for a real estate agent. “We talked about mortgages!” the happy prince says.Part fantasy, part comedy, “King Charles III” is still intended as a serious inquiry into the role the monarchy plays in Britain.“Here we have two things that are central to the DNA of this country: Shakespeare and the royal family,” said Rupert Goold, the play’s director. “As the play emerged in production, we realized more and more that this is our ‘Godfather,’ this is our ur-family onto whom we map all our own families, and we need to treat them like stiff-upper-lip, rhetorical, ancient Corleones.”The play is the first directed by Mr. Goold in his debut season as artistic director of the Almeida, a fashionable 325-seat theater in the Islington section of London. Mr. Goold’s earlier experiments have also been attention grabbing: turning “American Psycho” into a musical, for example, and directing Patrick Stewart in a bloody, Stalinist-era “Macbeth.” His provocative style would have normally made him resistant to a new play in verse, he said, adding that it is the type of thing written by “retired majors or strange little women in the home counties.”Those labels hardly describe Mr. Bartlett, 33, one of the most successful young playwrights in Britain, whose daring, cutting-edge explorations — including “Love, Love, Love,” “Bull” and a play that The New York Times referred to as “The Cockfight Play” — have touched on everything from global warming to office politics to bisexuality.In an interview last week, Mr. Bartlett said he has always been fascinated by the complicated gravitational pull that the monarchy exerts on public and private life in Britain.“When Diana died, the response of the British people was so astonishing, and the same with William and Kate’s wedding,” he said. “Suddenly, all these incredibly intelligent, very sophisticated people become deliberate peasants, and I don’t mean that in a judgmental way. But there’s something about hierarchy that’s comforting. And that’s a very uncomfortable idea in 21st-century thought.”The action of the play begins when Charles (Tim Pigott-Smith) withholds his signature from a privacy law passed by Parliament that would partly restrict freedom of the press because of past indiscretions, including phone hacking. Justifying his shocking decision to reassert royal power, Charles says that the British people possess a “wise and ancient bond” with the crown that’s far stronger than their mere 500-year-old attachment to democracy, which he dismisses as “an option added on/ like SatNav on a car, it does not come/As standard.“Mr. Pigott-Smith, who has appeared in dozens of Shakespeare’s works — famously as Octavius in Peter Hall’s 1987 staging of “Antony and Cleopatra” at the National Theater — said this play would come as a special thrill for those schooled in Shakespeare. “In the first scene, you meet the royal family, and in the second scene, you meet Prince Harry in a nightclub. Well, that’s straight out of Prince Hal in the tavern on Eastcheap,” he said, referring to “Henry IV, Part 1.”Mr. Pigott-Smith, who has met Prince Charles several times, said he has “great respect for the monarchy,” and would not have taken the part if the play seemed frivolous. That concern was dispelled, he said, when he read the script, which he called “a staggering achievement.”Mr. Bartlett said that the decision to set his play in the future was done to avoid the trap into which other portrayals of royal life have sometimes stumbled: romanticization. The play is one of several recent dramatic investigations of the royals on film (“Diana,” “The Queen”) and onstage, including Peter Morgan’s “The Audience,” which played here last year, and Moira Buffini’s “Handbagged,” a play about Queen Elizabeth’s relationship with Margaret Thatcher that is now at the Vaudeville Theater in the West End.“There’s a huge difference between dramatizing something in the past and this sort of future history thing,” Mr. Bartlett said. “By looking to the future, you free up the audience’s preconceptions about the family, so the audience is not stuck in its ideas of what the royal family was. You have a freer hand to tell a new story.”Mr. Bartlett and Mr. Goold both said they were surprised by the way Kate, the duchess of Cambridge, played by Lydia Wilson, was described by some critics as a “poisonously ambitious” or “scheming.”“She’s no more scheming than many of the men in the play,” Mr. Bartlett said. “But when you have a woman who’s powerful and clever and not of royal birth in a play like this, everyone immediately says, ‘Oh, it’s Lady Macbeth.’ “ At one point in the play, Kate’s character comments on how she’s regarded as “just a plastic doll”:Whose only job is prettying the Prince, and thenIf possible, get pregnant with the royalAnd noble bump, to there produce some heirs.Mr. Bartlett, an unapologetic populist, said that he wrote his play as much for London theatergoers as the readers of the British gossip magazine Hello.“It’s written to be appealing to people who hate the royal family, love the royal family, young people who feel very disconnected from the old generation but who might know a bit more about Harry,” he said. “We try to collect all those different pockets of audience and then pull them in toward the main thrust of the story, which is exactly what Shakespeare does. That’s the tradition: Everybody is welcome.”