Welcome to NYT Now, the new app from The New York Times.Here’s what you need to know:• Rockets, retaliation, repeat.The death toll continues to climb in Gaza, with both sides locked in a cycle of violence — rocket fire and airstrikes — that seems to show no sign of abating.“Since Israel does not deal directly with Hamas, which refuses to recognize Israel’s right to exist, the two cannot reach understandings on their own,” says Isabel Kershner, one of our reporters in Jerusalem.“For now, they are talking the language of bombs and rockets,” she says.“If anything, the adversaries seem headed for further escalation and a possible ground invasion of Gaza by Israel. The situation may well get worse before it gets better.”• Stiff competition.Netflix  received 31 Emmy nominations today, signaling a shift that the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences’ chairman hailed as “great news.”“But it’s not necessarily great news if you’re a broadcast network like NBC or CBS,” says Dave Itzkoff, one of our culture reporters.First, networks had competition from cable.“Now they also have to vie with Netflix and Amazon and Yahoo and anyone else who can provide this kind of narrative content,” he says.This competition is playing out in awards season.“The traditional networks can’t get the kind of recognition (or the number of nominations) they used to at the Emmys,” Mr. Itzkoff says.“It’s not a judgment on the quality of what the networks are offering. Just a reality that there are a finite number of nomination slots and more providers than ever who are fighting for them.”• Testing a friendship.“Ordinary Germans were not necessarily astonished that America might spy, but senior politicians were really hurt.”That’s Alison Smale, our Berlin bureau chief, discussing American spying in Germany, which has driven a wedge between the two nations.After a year’s wait for explanations for the spying, German officials demanded today that the chief American intelligence official there leave.“The country that rebuilt Germany and taught democracy here after the Nazis — the ally that helped to end Germany’s division and Communist rule — had betrayed them,” Ms. Smale says of the reaction of Germany’s leaders.She adds that the divide is reflected in the attitude toward Edward J. Snowden, the former National Security Agency analyst who released classified documents.“Snowden here is widely admired for exposing U.S. intelligence practices,” she says. “Very few see him as a traitor.”• Long live the cupcake!The downfall of the Crumbs Bake Shop chain does not mean the death of the cupcake.It’s more a sign of a “nation weary of expensive, highly processed caloric indulgences,” says Kim Severson, one of our food writers.“In other words,” she says, “don’t blame the cupcake, blame the corporatization of the cupcake.”Crumbs announced on Monday that it was closing its stores, though it indicated today that it might have found new financing.Ms. Severson says Crumbs served “frosted monstrosities” in odd flavors: cookie dough, cotton candy and “what vaguely resembled a margarita.”Many critics didn’t think that they were all that good.“In an age where the handcrafted, the curated and the artisan are the coin of the realm when it comes to food, Crumbs had no place,” Ms. Severson says.“But the cupcake itself does.”MARKETS• Wall Street stocks closed down. The S.&P. 500 fell 0.41 percent.(Earlier we erroneously reported that the S.&P. 500 rose.)TONIGHT• Scandinavia. An American lawyer marries a Swedish woman and moves to Stockholm, eventually becoming a stand-up comedian. That’s the premise for “Welcome to Sweden,” created by and starring Greg Poehler (brother of Amy, the star of “Parks and Recreation,” who is also an executive producer of the new show) (9 p.m. Eastern, NBC).• Not your ordinary cooking show.On “Snack-Off,” a new series, amateur chefs must create dishes using snacks like jelly beans and French fries for prizes.The chef Eddie Huang hosts; the model Chrissy Teigen, the chef Jason Quinn and the comedian Yassir Lester judge the results (10:30 p.m. Eastern, MTV).• A religious boot camp.“Kidnapped for Christ” takes viewers inside a school in the Dominican Republic where American parents hoped that God and discipline would straighten out their teenage children.The documentary “offers a glimpse into a disturbing world full of questionable practices and motives,” writes our TV critic Neil Genzlinger (7:30 p.m. Eastern, Showtime).• Can’t wait until Sunday’s big final?“The World Cup Project,” an 11-part documentary series, explores soccer as a tool for social development around the world. And the filmmakers volunteered to help the organizations they feature in each installment (streaming at snagfilms.com/show/the_world_cup_project).• If you’re staying up…“The Tonight Show”: The comedian Dana Carvey; the actress Hailee Steinfeld; and the Canadian reggae band Magic! performs (11:35 p.m. Eastern, NBC).“Late Show With David Letterman”: Michael Douglas; the comedian Paul Morrissey; and the singer Kiesza (11:35 p.m. Eastern, NBC).TOMORROW• George Herman Ruth stepped up to the plate.One hundred years ago, a 19-year-old rookie made his major league debut for the Boston Red Sox, which promptly won three of the next five World Series with the star pitcher.But the Babe was then traded to the archrival New York Yankees, where he went on to win four more championships and become one of history’s best hitters.Adeel Hassan contributed reporting.Your Evening Briefing is posted at 5 p.m. weekdays.Don’t miss Your Morning Briefing at 6 a.m. weekdays.What would you like to see here? Email us at NYTNow@NYTimes.com.Follow us on Twitter: @NYTNow.