TRIPOLI, Libya —  Rockets exploded in showers of sparkles over Martyrs’ Square here on Monday, and thousands of Libyans raced their cars up and down the coastal highway, flying flags and honking their horns in celebration of the third anniversary of the start of the uprising that overthrew the longtime ruler Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.Libyans complain that their leaders have squandered the revolution, engaging in power struggles and enriching themselves while doing little to improve the lives of citizens. Carjackings and kidnappings are so frequent that some people even lament the bygone security of Colonel Qaddafi’s dictatorship and call for a new strong hand to control the many militias and criminals at large.Yet the enthusiasm for the revolution that rid the country of the “tyrant,” as many refer to him, is still emphatic and widespread. The crowds in Tripoli, the capital, appeared undaunted even when a small car bomb exploded just yards from Martyrs’ Square. The front seats of the car were damaged, but no one was wounded.“It means everything to me and to the Libyans,” said Abdul Hedi al-Kikli, 58, who took his family three years ago and went to join rebels in the mountains.“We may have some negativity now, but it will not last,” Mr. Kikli said. “I don’t care about the situation now. What we have done is lay the foundations for change. It is for the next generation, even if our generation might not know democracy.”In Tajura, an area on the outskirts of Tripoli that was one of the first around the capital where citizens protested against the Qaddafi government, the mood remains wholeheartedly in support of the revolution. Amid the bunting on the main square, organizers posted images of 60 men and women who died in the uprising.The authorities chose Feb. 17, when the first demonstrations were planned in 2011, to commemorate the uprising, though they could have chosen one of a number of days. For example, protesters in the eastern town of Benghazi came out on Feb. 15 and began clashing with the police.Three days later, in Tajura, young people began milling around outside the small, glass-fronted Morning Light Cafe. “It began here, yes,” said Saleh al-Turki, 33, who was among the protesters. “People were talking about demonstrating in support of the people of Benghazi.” As men emerged from the mosques after evening prayers, the crowd swelled and began marching.“We began chanting, ‘With our blood, our souls, we sacrifice ourselves, Benghazi!’ ” Mr. Turki recalled. “By the time we got to the roundabout we were chanting, ‘No more fear, Tajura, real men died in Benghazi.’ ”The first casualty in the district was a person shot by the police on Feb. 19, and a larger crowd turned out for the funeral the next day. On Feb. 25, protesters were in the streets for four hours and marched to the neighboring Souk al-Juma district. “It was a peaceful protest, but they were shooting at us,” Mr. Turki said.The police crackdown that followed was harsh. The marchers were dispersed with live gunfire, and hundreds were arrested as tanks and police vehicles blockaded the area. Six months of underground operations followed as protesters tried covert resistance, knocking out street lamps and going out at night to put up graffiti and revolutionary flags. “We would freeze flags into a ball and put them up,” Ahmed Tantoush, 38, a former rebel, said with a grin. “When they melted, they would unfurl.” The protesters also threw small bombs at police patrols, he said.After several months, some weapons were smuggled into Tajura, but the protesters say they never had the strength to attack the security forces. It was only when rebels reached the capital, six months after the uprising began, that Colonel Qaddafi and his supporters were forced out. That day, the people of Tajura came out and took control of their district.Not everyone was celebrating on Monday. “I’m going back home. I don’t like the government,” Mr. Turki said. “The economy is asleep. There are no companies working.”His friend Tareq al-Swaie, 23, added: “The first two years we were hoping for things to get better, but now we are disappointed. Maybe they should be bringing in foreign companies. But if you are afraid in your own country, how can you expect foreigners to come in?”Almost everyone agrees that the greatest gains from the revolution are freedom from tyranny and freedom of speech. “First of all, we can speak freely,” said one woman, Amna Ali, a teacher who came to Tripoli from western Libya for the celebrations. “We are not afraid to speak our minds.”Before the uprising, “you could not say anything,” said Adel Lootfi, 34, a military policeman. “If you did, you might disappear.” Now, though, he is quick with a list of complaints about the country’s current leaders. “It’s been three years, and they have not done anything,” he said. “We need infrastructure, better jobs. We don’t have good airports.”Like several of those interviewed who had fought against Colonel Qaddafi, Mr. Lootfi said he wanted a strong ruler, instead of the exiles who returned to serve in the government. “We need someone who is not from abroad, someone who understands Libyans,” he said. “The people need someone who is tough.”Omar Saleh, 35, a former revolutionary from the district of Feshloom, said: “Change is not easy. It takes time to change the mentality.”“For me,” Mr. Saleh said, “the most important thing is to build the human being to respect the law and institutions, and then you will have people able to live in a democracy.”