Good morning.Here’s what you need to know: • Crisis mode. President Obama will remain at the White House today to direct the response to the Ebola virus. There are two confirmed cases in the U.S.Though the House is in recess, there is a hearing on the Hill today on the crisis. Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, testifies.And Ebola screenings begin today for travelers from Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone at Washington-Dulles, Newark-Liberty, Chicago-O’Hare and Atlanta International airports.• Detroit settles with key creditor.A settlement between Detroit and its last major holdout creditor resolves all issues involving the city’s outstanding pension debt, an attorney for the city told bankruptcy court today.The creditor will drop its objections to the city’s plan to adjust $18 billion of debt and exit the biggest-ever municipal bankruptcy.• The F.B.I. vs. the iPhone.In his first major speech as the agency’s director, James B. Comey will say today that encryption technologies used on devices like the new iPhone have become so sophisticated that data will be hidden and crimes will go unsolved.• Still in the streets.Hong Kong’s leader said today that he is ready to hold new talks next week with the student leaders of the pro-democracy demonstrations.The announcement comes after fresh scuffles between protesters and the police.• Lost in Nepal.Rescue teams are trying to account for more than 70 climbers after a blizzard dumped snow and triggered avalanches along a route on Annapurna, the 10th highest peak in the world. At least 20 people are confirmed dead.• Mobile upgrades.New versions of the iPad are expected at an Apple event in California today, while Google prepares an update of its Android mobile software for Friday.• Joining an exclusive club.Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand and Venezuela won four of the rotating seats on the U.N. Security Council today.Spain won a third round of voting over Turkey for the final spot. The five join the permanent members (the U.S., China, France, Russia and Britain) at the start of 2015.• Gay marriages in limbo in Alaska.The first same-sex wedding ceremonies in the state were to go ahead today, but a federal appeals court issued a temporary stay. Alaska now has to decide whether to abide by the opinion.• Iran nuclear talks resume.Senior officials from the U.S., France, Britain, Germany, Russia and China resume negotiations with Iran in Vienna today.“Substantial work” remains, a senior State Department official said Wednesday after Secretary of State John Kerry met his Iranian counterpart for talks.• Bermuda in harm’s way.Gonzalo, a Category 4 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 140 miles per hour, is expected to hit Bermuda on Friday, with tropical storm conditions starting tonight.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks sank another 1 percent this morning but trimmed their losses by afternoon. A rocky Wednesday saw a 2 percent loss before a recovery at day’s end.European shares closed mixed after diving 2 percent. Asian indexes were mostly lower, with the Nikkei ending off 2.2 percent.• A big tax-motivated merger is essentially off.AbbVie, the Illinois pharmaceutical company, says it now opposes its proposed $54 billion acquisition of Shire, listed in London, after the Treasury changed the tax rules.• Netflix stock plunged 23 percent at the market opening today after it reported fewer new subscribers than expected, and because HBO said it would offer a competing streaming video service next year.CBS unveiled its own subscription streaming service this morning.• Goldman Sachs  turned in significantly better third-quarter results than expected.• Amazon is hiring. It said today it will add 80,000 temporary employees for this year’s holiday season, a 14 percent increase from last year.• But Walmart cut its sales forecast for the season and will slow its store openings next year.NOTEWORTHY• Royals roll.Kansas City advanced to the World Series, finishing a four-game sweep of the Baltimore Orioles in the A.L. Championship Series with a 2-1 victory on Wednesday.In the N.L. series, San Francisco rallied to defeat the St. Louis Cardinals, 6-4. The Giants are one win away from the World Series. They’ll play again tonight (8 o’clock Eastern, FS1).• Preparing for the big one.More than 20.3 million people are expected to participate today in the world’s largest earthquake drill at 10:16 a.m. (which matches the date, 10/16), their local time.The so-called Great ShakeOut occurs days after a report found that California’s Bay Area could face bigger temblors than previously predicted. More than 10 million people there will take part.• Women rule.The top six singles this week on the Billboard Hot 100 are all by female acts.At the peak is Meghan Trainor’s “All About That Bass,” followed by Taylor Swift’s “Shake It Off” and Iggy Azalea’s “Black Widow.”• Third time’s a charm.Neil Patrick Harris will host the Academy Awards presentation in February, his third big awards show after M.C.'ing the Tonys and the Emmys.• No worries.Today’s tech tips: There are apps to help you get happy, and we tell you how to keep your tracks hidden from the start of your web browsing session.BACK STORYWhat does Yellowstone National Park have to do with the test for the Ebola virus?The famous hot springs there foster a special kind of microbe that plays a central role in the lab.To identify a virus, technicians need to put a little bit of genetic material in blood through a high-temperature process that makes it replicate millions of times.It turns out the heat-loving microbes from Yellowstone provide a necessary enzyme — and don’t mind the near-boiling temperature at all.A biologist found the microbe in 1966 and successfully grew it in a lab. One of the early biotechnology companies incorporated it into the test that became widely used for the virus that causes AIDS.And now Ebola.Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Email us at briefing@nytimes.com.