Welcome to the Morning Briefing on NYT Now, the new app from The New York Times. (Download us for iPhone.)The briefing goes live at 6 a.m. to help you get ready for your day.Here’s what you need to know for Monday:• Runners are heading to the starting line.There will be 9,000 more runners at the Boston Marathon this morning than last year, when two bombs set off near the finish line killed three and injured more than 260.The 36,000 include many who weren’t able to finish in 2013 and expanded teams running for charity.A record one million spectators, double last year’s turnout, are expected amid tight security.Update: Meb Keflizighi won the men’s title, the first American to win it since 1983. Rita Jeptoo, a Kenyan, became the seventh three-time winner of the women’s title.• Vice President Biden arrives in Ukraine’s capital.He’ll meet with the acting prime minister and president as well as legislators and democracy activists on Tuesday.The Times reports that many of the men who have seized Ukrainian government sites appear to be Russian operatives.• Divers are bringing up more bodies in South Korea.The death toll stands at 87, with 215 people still missing, most of them high school students.Earlier today, the nation’s president called the crew’s behavior “akin to murder.”• Got health care? Now it’s time to change your password.The government is warning consumers “out of an abundance of caution” to change their password on HealthCare.gov because of the “Heartbleed” security bug.• A crowded White House.More than 30,000 guests will be on the South Lawn for the annual Easter egg roll. The event will be streamed live.On Tuesday, President Obama leaves for a weeklong trip that includes stops in Japan, South Korea, Malaysia and the Philippines.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks are trading marginally higher. European markets are mostly closed, and Asia ended mixed.• Netflix announces its earnings today for the first time since it agreed to pay Comcast for faster delivery of its streaming service.NOTEWORTHY• Laying a literary giant to rest.A public memorial for Gabriel García Márquez will be held today in Mexico City’s opulent Palacio de Bellas Artes.The president of Mr. García Márquez’s native Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos, will attend. He expressed hope that some of Mr. García Márquez’s ashes will find their way to his home country.• On The Times’s best-selling books lists.In hardcover nonfiction, Michael Lewis remains at No. 1 with “Flash Boys.” “Face the Music,” a memoir by the Kiss guitarist Paul Stanley, debuts at No. 2.Among hardcover fiction books, Peter Matthiessen, who died on April 5 at 86, enters at No. 9 with his final novel, “In Paradise.”• “Today” extends its reach to radio.NBC’s four-hour morning TV program will be coming to radio this summer, the network and Sirius satellite radio will announce today, allowing viewers to follow along after they start their commute.OVER THE WEEKEND• More than 150,000 people in Vatican City watched Pope Francis make an Easter Sunday plea for peace in Ukraine and Syria and for more attention to the neediest worldwide.• Rubin (Hurricane) Carter, a boxer whose career was cut short by a murder conviction and 19-year imprisonment before the charges against him were dismissed, died Sunday at his home in Toronto.• “Heaven Is for Real” couldn’t topple a superhero (“Captain America: The Winter Soldier”) at the box office this weekend. But the faith-based movie took in an estimated $21.5 million, becoming the fourth this year with an overt religious theme to qualify as a hit.• With victories on Sunday, the Boston Bruins and the Philadelphia Flyers evened their first-round Stanley Cup playoff series.• In the N.B.A., the San Antonio Spurs, Miami Heat, Washington Wizards and the Portland Trail Blazers all won their playoff openers.BACK STORY One advantage of being queen: If you want to celebrate your birthday twice a year, no one can stop you.Queen Elizabeth II turns 88 today, and she’ll have a private day to celebrate with her family.But she also has a second birthday, falling on a Saturday in June, for the public.The June spectacle includes a sprawling parade in an event known as Trooping the Colour.The tradition dates to King Edward VII, the monarch from 1901 to 1910. It started because he was born in November but the weather in the summer was better suited for a birthday bash.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m.Don’t miss Your Evening Briefing at 6 p.m.What would you like to see here? Email us at NYTNow@NYTimes.com.