ATHENS — Greek and European Union leaders gathered last week in the Athens opera house to sing each other’s praises for saving Greece and Europe from financial disaster, pointing to faint signs of economic recovery after six years of recession in the country that ignited the Continent’s tumultuous debt crisis in 2009.The ceremony culminated what was supposed to be a celebration of Greece’s role as the European Union’s new president, a rotating position that lasts six months and confers little real power but which usually stirs national pride and helps tamp down domestic political rivalries.Absent from the celebratory chorus, however, was the protagonist of a Greek political drama that, unlike the country’s painful economic situation, shows no sign of calming.The no-show was Alexis Tsipras, the leader of what polls show is Greece’s most popular political party. He is also a relentless critic of economic policies that have been blamed for Greece’s 27 percent unemployment rate, policies that are also raising hopes that the country will in 2014 record its first year of economic growth since 2007.Mr. Tsipras, who heads Syriza, a fractious grouping of left-wing forces, said he wanted no part in a “pre-election fiesta” put on by Prime Minister Antonis Samaras, who heads a fragile and deeply unpopular coalition government. Nor, added Mr. Tsipras, could he cheer economic policies that are largely dictated by Germany and have made budget cuts and other austerity measures the main prescription for Europe’s economic ills.There are signs that Greece’s churning politics could blow its rosier economic forecasts off course. The credit rating agency Fitch, in a report on Greece issued last month, identified political instability as a “significant” risk.“Reform fatigue,” Fitch noted, “is taking its toll of the coalition’s popularity and defections have reduced its majority in Parliament to just four M.P.'s.” (This has since slipped to three.)A new election, added Fitch, “could produce an anti-austerity, anti-E.U. administration, albeit one that stopped short of Greek exit from the euro.”The European Union, Mr. Tsipras said in an interview at his party’s headquarters in Athens, “has become a Germanic Union” and put Greece and other struggling nations “on a very bad road” by demanding grinding austerity in return for bailout funds.“What has happened in Greece in the last few years is a stain on European civilization,” said Mr. Tsipras, who looks set to become Greece’s next prime minister, or at least its kingmaker in Parliament, if his party’s popularity holds.Anger at Germany, whose chancellor, Angela Merkel, has resisted any write-off of Greek debts, is widespread across much of Southern Europe but is particularly acute in Athens. Unidentified gunmen in late December opened fire with an assault rifle on the residence of the German ambassador. Nobody was hurt.On the day Mr. Tsipras skipped a ceremony attended by José Manuel Barroso, the president of the European Commission, and by other dignitaries from Brussels, Mr. Samaras’s party, New Democracy, denounced Syriza as having “well-known links to terrorism.”The accusation followed the “escape” of Christodoulos Xiros, a terrorist serving six life sentences for his role in multiple killings and bombings by the leftist guerrilla group November 17, which has been dismantled. He disappeared last Monday during a prison furlough, stirring dismay in Washington and speculation in the Greek news media of a resurgence of political violence.New Democracy presented no evidence of any links to terrorism by Syriza, which dismissed the claim as part of a government campaign to stir public fear against the left at a time when the main threat of political violence comes from Golden Dawn, an extreme rightist party with 18 seats in Parliament. Half of these lawmakers face criminal charges for joining and organizing what prosecutors say is a criminal organization. Golden Dawn nonetheless remains Greece’s third most popular party.“Our main enemy, our main opponent, is the fear that the government and media try to create about Syriza and a leftist government in Greece,” Mr. Tsipras said. “We are fighting for a very big change, a radical political change. In front of every change there are a lot of people who are afraid for the future.”European and Greek leaders stressed the importance of sticking with the current course, focusing on glimmers of economic hope, particularly a possible return to growth and a sharp narrowing of a once gaping budget deficit. Greece has moved ahead of schedule into a so-called primary budget surplus, a calculation that excludes interest payments.Greece predicts that its economy will grow 0.6 percent in 2014. But others, including the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, say that even this is too optimistic and forecast another year of contraction.“Greece, after huge sacrifices, is able to say that it is leaving behind the crisis,” Mr. Samaras said at a joint news conference with Mr. Barroso last week in Athens. “Greece is now standing on its own feet.”Its politics, however, are decidedly unsteady, and support for the European Union, according to an opinion poll released this month by Gallup, has never been lower. The approval rating among Greeks of the Union’s leadership, according to the survey, has fallen to 19 percent at the start of this year from 60 percent in 2009.Mr. Samaras is hoping to hang on in office until at least 2016, when the next national elections are due to be held. “As a person, I always see the glass half full,” he told journalists on Friday.But with his main coalition partner, the Pasok party, slumping in opinion polls, falling far behind even Golden Dawn; with left-wing forces poised to do well in May elections for the European Parliament; and with early national elections look increasingly likely, his term in office could easily be cut short, political analysts say.Mr. Tsipras, his possible successor, has backed away from past rhetoric about abandoning the euro and said he does not want Greece to drop out of the 18-country zone that uses the currency. But he does want a fundamental reworking of the terms of Greece’s bailout funds, worth 240 billion euros, or about $328 billion.“Our intention is to change the framework, not smash the euro,” he said, suggesting that Europe should hold a conference on debt akin to that held in London in 1953 that agreed to write off a big chunk of the debts incurred by Germany before and after World War II.