MADRID — Undaunted by the defeat of the Scottish independence movement a day earlier, separatists in the Catalonia region of northeastern Spain pressed ahead on Friday with plans to hold a similar vote there.The regional Parliament in Barcelona voted overwhelmingly, 106 to 28, to give its leader the power to call a vote on independence, a step that the central government in Madrid has said would be illegal. The vote is planned for Nov. 9.Despite its outcome, Scotland’s referendum “opens the way for us, because what happened there is that they voted,” Artur Mas, the head of Catalonia’s regional government, said at a news conference.Mr. Mas said Scotland had provided “a great lesson in democracy,” and urged Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, to follow Mr. Cameron’s example and allow a referendum, rather than continue to veto proposal after proposal. “To think you can shut up a Catalan society that wants to vote isn’t going to work in a democracy of the 21st century,” Mr. Mas said.Mr. Rajoy’s government said on Friday that it expected Spain’s constitutional court to strike down any attempt to hold a vote that violated Spain’s constitution.Soraya Sáenz de Santamaría, Mr. Rajoy’s deputy, said at a separate news conference that the lesson from Scotland was that voting worked when it was done legally, within a country’s own democratic rules. “British democracy has its own organization,” different from that of Spain, she said.Catalonia has a distinct language and sense of cultural identity, and has generally done better economically than the country as a whole. A widespread belief that Catalans are made to pay unfairly to subsidize the rest of Spain has helped fuel separatist sentiment.Leaders of Mr. Rajoy’s center-right Popular Party insist that any question of separation must be put to a vote of all Spaniards, not just Catalans. Santi Rodriguez, a Popular Party member of the regional Parliament, told The Associated Press on Friday, “There are not just seven million of us who would be affected by this. There are 47 million.”