It is the iconic green space of New York City, internationally renowned and beloved by generations of natives and visitors alike.Yet for Mayor Bill de Blasio, Central Park and its emerald fields have morphed into something else: an improbable political battleground.The mayor’s plan to ban horse-drawn carriages, an obscure proposal until Mr. de Blasio embraced it in last year’s mayoral race, has erupted into a cause célèbre, landing on the cover of The New Yorker and dominating local headlines, even as Mr. de Blasio is trying to refocus his administration on housing and wage issues.International celebrities and federal investigators are swooping in. Nicolas Sarkozy, the former French president, said in New York this week that he wanted the horses to stay. The Federal Bureau of Investigation is looking into a political group that worked with animal-rights lobbyists to support Mr. de Blasio’s candidacy, The Daily News reported on Friday.And donors to Central Park have been alarmed at the mayor’s interest in a Robin Hood-style plan to reroute some of their contributions to the city’s less affluent greenswards, an idea Mr. de Blasio called “creative” and “productive.”It is an unexpectedly tense position for a mayor who has declared that “parkland is sacred” and was married under a pin oak tree in Prospect Park, a few blocks from his Brooklyn home. But Mr. de Blasio has had trouble controlling the conversation about his views.Behind the scenes, his team is working with the Central Park Conservancy to assist poorer parks in the city. But Mr. de Blasio’s staff did not sound out the conservancy on his plan to replace the horse carriages with electric cars.Officials of the conservancy have said the group has no position on the carriages but does object to the introduction of the electric cars.As The Daily News ratcheted up a campaign to keep the horse carriages, with day after day of front-page headlines, Mr. de Blasio did little to respond, declining to provide details about how his team would go about closing the industry.In private, top aides to Mr. de Blasio dismiss the rumpus over the horses, calling it a silly sideshow.But that is not a universally shared view.“The horse carriages have reached the point where they have the potential to divert the mayoral agenda, and that’s the one thing you don’t want to have happen,” said Mitchell Moss, director of the Rudin Center for Transportation at New York University.Mr. de Blasio, so enamored of his Brooklyn home that he has delayed moving into Gracie Mansion, also faces the perception that he is not a cheerleader for Manhattan.The mayor spoke at a Little League ceremony in Prospect Park this month but has not stepped inside Central Park since his inauguration.When Tavern on the Green, the park’s famous restaurant, reopened on Thursday, Mr. de Blasio did not attend. (He was attending the opening of a Manhattan hospital’s emergency room, closed since Hurricane Sandy.)Previous mayors have enjoyed cozier relationships with Central Park. Michael R. Bloomberg was lauded for putting on “The Gates,” a large-scale public art exhibit in the park in 2005. Edward I. Koch commemorated the 1988 reopening of the Central Park Zoo by throwing out fish to the sea lions.“Mayors in the past have used the park to enhance their stature. Now, the issue of the park is diminishing his stature,” Kenneth Sherrill, a longtime teacher of political science at Hunter College, said of Mr. de Blasio. “Everybody knows that this issue is not what he wanted to have people talking about right now.”“It’s not the lack of management experience that has haunted him,” Mr. Sherrill added. “It is the inability to exercise political control.”The mayor’s press secretary, Phil Walzak, said the horse carriage debate, while an “impassioned” one, had not distracted Mr. de Blasio from other issues, like Hurricane Sandy relief and affordable housing.“We are doing simultaneously many things on policy,” Mr. Walzak said.Still, the horses show few signs of leaving the news. Animal-rights activists and the carriage industry have hired high-priced political consultants to aid their cause.Mr. de Blasio is also feeling pressure from allies. After promising to close the industry during his first days in office, the mayor pushed back the deadline to the end of the year, irritating NYClass, the animal-rights group that supported his campaign.Stephen Nislick, a parking-garage magnate who led the campaign against horse-drawn carriages, has sought advice in frequent telephone calls to Mr. de Blasio’s senior political advisers, according to two people familiar with the conversations.The mayor is unveiling an ambitious housing plan next week, which may divert attention from Central Park. But the horse question could soon move from the political realm to a legal one. Federal investigators are examining the activities of carriage opponents who helped finance an ad blitz against Mr. de Blasio’s chief rival in the Democratic primary, Christine C. Quinn.Scott Levenson, a political consultant involved in the anti-Quinn effort, said in an interview on Friday that he had “not been contacted by any investigative agency regarding the Anybody But Quinn campaign.”He said that his firm’s activities were “democracy as usual” and that he had not coordinated his activities with Mr. de Blasio or his campaign aides, which could be a violation of election law.A spokesman for NYClass said it had no knowledge of a federal investigation and had done nothing wrong.Legal tangles could also arise if City Hall pursues a plan, proposed by State Senator Daniel L. Squadron, to redistribute some donations from private park conservancies to other city parks.Mr. Walzak said that Mr. de Blasio was intrigued by the proposal, but that City Hall would discuss the issue extensively with conservancies before any final arrangement was reached.Mr. Walzak said the administration had already engaged in “positive and fully productive discussions” with the Central Park Conservancy to ensure the vibrancy of Central Park and improve the city’s broader network of green spaces.Still, it could take time before the new mayor is as revered by Central Park’s patrons as his predecessor has been. The conservancy is holding an annual gala fund-raiser next month.The honoree? Michael R. Bloomberg.