Welcome to NYT Now, the new app from The New York Times.Here’s what you need to know:• Pressing ahead on global warming.The Supreme Court handed President Obama a legal victory today as his administration pursues regulations aimed at curbing climate change.Coral Davenport, our environment reporter, says the court upheld the E.P.A.'s authority to “regulate planet-warming greenhouse gases from large, industrial polluters, such as power plants.”The court also found the E.P.A. could not regulate small-scale emitters (schools, apartment buildings, small businesses).“And that’s just fine with the E.P.A.,” she says.Ms. Davenport says the agency didn’t want the obligation of overseeing millions of small sources, which represent only a small fraction of the nation’s carbon emissions.“Their target all along has been coal-fired power plants,” she says, “which are far and away the biggest source of carbon pollution.”• Bouncing back.Three days is not a lot of time for the U.S. soccer team to rest up and prepare for their next World Cup game, against Germany on Thursday.The team has some major challenges, says Andrew Das, who is overseeing our World Cup coverage in Brazil.The first, of course, is recovering from the emotional gut punch of allowing Portugal to tie their game on Sunday night in the final seconds.Now, Mr. Das says, the U.S. team is worn out, drained by the severe heat — it was an “absolute sauna” — and all the miles bouncing from city to city for games.“It’s a brutal gantlet,” he says, “but the only way out is through.”And the U.S. has a tough opponent: Germany is strong and has an extra day of rest.“Don’t let anyone tell you these teams will play for a tie,” he says. “Germans play to win. So do Americans.”• Egypt’s rule of law.A decision by an Egyptian judge today to convict three journalists from Al Jazeera of conspiracy has drawn international condemnation, especially from the Obama administration.David Kirkpatrick, our Cairo bureau chief, says the verdict was “clearly embarrassing, if not inconvenient, for Washington.”He says it came just as the Obama administration “appears to be trying to walk back its threats to continue suspending military aid to Egypt unless the country shows progress toward democracy.”The journalists were sentenced to lengthy prison terms on what are widely seen as politicized charges of collaborating with the Muslim Brotherhood to broadcast false reports of strife in Egypt.“The verdict clearly undermines any progress toward democracy or freedom of the press,” Mr. Kirkpatrick says. “But it is not clear that Washington believes it has the power to change it, or the will to try.”• Emperor Obama, or so they say.“There are lots of reasons Republicans are pressing the case against the I.R.S., but the biggest one is probably that it plays into their midterm election strategy of painting this administration as an ‘imperial presidency.'”That’s David Joachim, a reporter in our Washington bureau, discussing inquiries by House Republicans, including a hearing tonight, into allegations that tax officials targeted Tea Party groups.Senior congressional Republicans say the White House has repeatedly strong-armed lawmakers.“President Obama hasn’t been shy about invoking his executive authority to work around a deadlocked Congress — most recently on global warming and same-sex marriage,” Mr. Joachim says.“The I.R.S. scandal builds on that notion of overreach by the executive,” he adds. “And I.R.S. officials have often seemed combative and dismissive when dealing with the Republicans, fanning the flames.”• Not tuning in for their stories.It used to be the one night when daytime TV got the prime-time spotlight.But at the Daytime Emmy Awards on Sunday, the glamour was gone.One critic called the event a “top-to-bottom train wreck” that wasn’t even broadcast on television. (To watch, viewers had to catch the stream at daytimeemmys.net.)Perhaps it’s not surprising, given that soap operas no longer draw significant followings, says Stuart Elliott, our advertising columnist.“This really reflects ongoing demographic changes,” Mr. Elliott says, noting that fewer women are at home during the day. “And there’s also the rise of reality television, and shows like ‘Judge Judy,’ which get huge ratings.”“People these days would prefer to watch ‘The Real Housewives of Atlanta’ more than ‘Days of Our Lives,'” he says.TONIGHT• Slowly losing his legs.In the season premiere of “POV,” the filmmaker Jason DaSilva turns the camera on himself and his loved ones for “When I Walk.”The 90-minute documentary chronicles his decline since receiving a diagnosis of primary-progressive multiple sclerosis. (PBS, check local listings).• The back story of a civil-rights milestone.The two-hour documentary “The Case Against 8” follows two lawyers and four plaintiffs as they work for five years to overturn Proposition 8, California’s ban on same-sex marriage (9 p.m. Eastern, HBO).This week is the first anniversary of the Supreme Court ruling that effectively ended that state law.• If you’re staying up…On “The Daily Show”: Bill Maher (11 p.m. Eastern, Comedy Central).“The Colbert Report”: John Green, the author of the best-selling novel “The Fault in Our Stars,” which has been adapted for the big screen. (11:31 p.m. Eastern, Comedy Central).“The Tonight Show”: Brian Williams of NBC News; Christina Hendricks of “Mad Men”; and the chef Ilan Hall, who hosts the competition show “Knife Fight” on the Esquire Network (11:35 p.m. Eastern, NBC).TOMORROW• Primaries galore.Polling stations will be open in seven states, with the most-watched race in Mississippi. Senator Thad Cochran’s four-decade career in Congress is threatened by a Tea Party-backed challenger, Chris McDaniel, in a Republican runoff there.Our Upshot desk says that polling suggests that Mr. McDaniel has widened his slight advantage since the primary.In New York, Representative Charles B. Rangel, a Democrat who has represented Harlem since the 1970s, is trying to fend off a challenge from State Senator Adriano D. Espaillat.Adeel Hassan contributed reporting.Your Evening Briefing is posted at 5 p.m. weekdays.Don’t miss Your Morning Briefing at 6 a.m. weekdays.What would you like to see here? Email us at NYTNow@NYTimes.com.Follow us on Twitter: @NYTNow.