CARACAS, Venezuela —  In the latest in a series of theatrical accusations, the government here on Wednesday charged that the United States ambassador to Colombia was involved in a plot to kill President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela, but it offered no convincing proof.The accusation came as the House of Representatives in Washington passed a bill that calls on the White House to freeze the assets in the United States of Venezuelan officials responsible for human rights abuses during the government’s response to several weeks of widespread protests here.The Senate is also considering sanctions, although administration officials have said they do not think the timing is right and that sanctions could harm a sputtering effort to foster talks between the Venezuelan government and the opposition.The State Department called the latest accusations “baseless and false.”“We’ve seen many times that the Venezuelan government tries to distract from its own actions by blaming the United States,” it said in a statement.In Caracas, a group of the most senior officials in Mr. Maduro’s government held a televised news conference at the National Theater in which they said that they had proof that opposition leaders were plotting to murder the president.Yet the material they showed was limited to what they said were emails among opposition members, containing mostly generic complaints about the government or calls to action, including at least two emails that mentioned a State Department official who is now the new American ambassador to Colombia, Kevin Whitaker.Jorge Rodríguez, a member of the Socialist government’s political high command, read from what he said was an email sent on March 23 by an opposition leader, María Corina Machado.In the alleged email she praised antigovernment protests and said, “Kevin Whitaker reconfirmed to me his support and indicated new steps.”Mr. Rodríguez then held up a placard with the words “Assassination Plan” above a photograph of Mr. Whitaker, who was deputy assistant secretary of state for South America before becoming ambassador to Colombia last month, that appeared to be taken from the website of the American Embassy in Bogotá.“Did the State Department of the United States know that the Venezuelan ultraright, when it attempts to carry out its criminal acts that violate the constitution, peace and democracy, asks for instructions and authorization from a State Department official?” Mr. Rodríguez said. “Does President Barack Obama know?”Mr. Rodriguez was accompanied by the vice president, the first lady, the president of the National Assembly, the head of the national oil company and other government officials. Mr. Rodríguez said that Ms. Machado and others planned to kill Mr. Maduro but he did not say when or how the plot was supposed to unfold.Mr. Maduro was narrowly elected in April of last year, vowing to carry on the Socialist-inspired revolution of his mentor, President Hugo Chávez.