Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:Developing: • The Supreme Court on same-sex marriage. In a major surprise, the justices today denied review in all five pending same-sex marriage cases.The move clears the way for such marriages to proceed in Indiana, Oklahoma, Utah, Virginia and Wisconsin.The decision suggests that the court is not going to intercede in the issue until a federal appeals court upholds a state ban.• Almost normal in Hong Kong.The eight-lane highway leading to the financial district is still paralyzed today, but crowds of protesters have dwindled to a few hundred as pro-democracy demonstrations entered their second week.• The political homestretch.With just four weeks until Election Day, Republicans are maintaining their momentum, according to the latest data.They lead by at least four percentage points in enough races to finish with 50 Senate seats — only one short of the 51 seats they need to overcome Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s tiebreaking vote.• Fighting for his life.The first person found to have Ebola in the U.S. remains in critical condition in a Dallas hospital, but there are no more doses of the experimental medicine ZMapp.Gov. Rick Perry of Texas is expected to announce today a new initiative to respond to pandemic disease.• At the White House.President Obama meets his national security team and senior staff in the afternoon to receive an update on the Ebola outbreak in West Africa.Also today, financial regulators will join Mr. Obama for a discussion on the economy and Wall Street reform.• The best wake-up call.John O’Keefe, a British-American scientist, and the Norwegians May-Britt Moser and Edvard Moser today won the 2014 Nobel Prize in Medicine for discoveries of cells that make up a positioning system in the brain.• Promises not met.Most wealthy nations failed to meet their development aid pledges in 2013, and only a third of the money went to the poorest countries, says a report today from the anti-poverty group co-founded by the Irish singer Bono.• Still missing, six months on.The hunt for Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 resumed today in a desolate stretch of the Indian Ocean, more than six months after it disappeared with 239 people aboard.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks  are turning negative. European stocks closed mostly higher, and Asian indexes ended mixed.• Hewlett-Packard said today it will split into two entities: one focused on personal computers and printers, and the other on business hardware and software, according to the individuals close to the plan.The division, resulting in two companies with more than $50 billion each in revenue, is meant to make them more agile.• Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew and the Federal Reserve chairwoman Janet L. Yellen will update the health of the American financial system at the Financial Stability Oversight Council meeting today.• Square, the mobile-payments start-up, raised $150 million in venture financing, valuing the company at $6 billion, sources said.• Attitudes toward saving are measured in the Consumer Federation of America’s personal savings index released today.OVER THE WEEKEND• Jean-Claude Duvalier, a former president of Haiti known as Baby Doc who brutally ruled the country, died at age 63.• Brazil’s president, Dilma Rousseff, failed to win a majority of the vote in her re-election bid, opening the way for a runoff.• Pope Francis opened a two-week gathering of more than 200 senior Roman Catholic bishops to debate abortion, contraception, homosexuality and divorce.• Paul Revere, the keyboardist who founded the 1960s band Paul Revere & the Raiders, died at age 76.• “Gone Girl” led the weekend box office, generating $38 million, a huge result for an R-rated drama.• The price of Bitcoin fell nearly 20 percent this weekend to its lowest level of the year, prompting worries of a crash. After reaching its peak of about $1,150 late last year, the virtual currency has been in a prolonged slide, reaching $286 on Sunday.• Suffolk Downs, near Boston, held its final day of thoroughbred racing on Saturday. Meanwhile, a filly named Treve won her second straight Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe, one of Europe’s most prestigious horse races.• Catching up on TV: We have your episode recaps for “Homeland,” “Boardwalk Empire” and “The Good Wife.”NOTEWORTHY• One step closer to the World Series.Kansas City’s 8-3 victory over the Los Angeles Angels on Sunday night sends the Royals to the American League Championship Series. They face the Baltimore Orioles, who swept the Detroit Tigers.In the National League, the Washington Nationals try to stave off elimination when they visit the San Francisco Giants today (5 p.m. Eastern, MLB). And the Los Angeles Dodgers face the St. Louis Cardinals (9 p.m. Eastern, FS1). That series is tied 1-1.• Soaring TV deals.The N.B.A. is to announce today renewed broadcasting deals worth $24 billion, nearly triple its previous contracts, with ESPN and TNT.• No W.M.D.s.Ten years ago today, the top American inspector in Iraq released a report saying that his team had not found any evidence that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction.BACK STORYBy law, the Supreme Court begins its 2014-15 term on the first Monday of October. That’s today.The nine justices have already agreed to consider a number of high-profile cases, including possible employment discrimination against a woman in a head scarf.From now to the end of next June, they will hear arguments, deliberate and deliver opinions at the Supreme Court building across from the U.S. Capitol.But after the Constitution was adopted in 1789, the justices spent much of their time “riding circuit.” That meant literally traveling to a circuit of courts to decide cases.As the population grew, cases multiplied and the justices found their hands full with appeals in Washington. It became increasingly difficult for them to make the time for the rounds.In 1891, the federal court structure was revised, and the justices were freed from the requirement to travel.But not from the circuits: Each justice now handles stays and other issues for one or more of the country’s 13 circuit courts of appeal.Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Email us at briefing@nytimes.com.