ISLAMABAD, Pakistan —  As rain poured down, young men draped in political party flags danced in the streets of Islamabad on Saturday, waiting for the next stage of the “revolution” promised by Imran Khan, the opposition leader and former cricket star.“Our spirits are high,” said Tahir Inayat, a 19-year-old student. “We will stand with our leader under any situation. Rains cannot stop us.”Hours later, Mr. Khan addressed his drenched supporters, thousands of whom had followed him on a protest march from Lahore, reiterating his core demand — the resignation of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif — and calling for new elections.“The nation has decided,” he said. “Nawaz Sharif will have to resign.” Thousands of flag-waving supporters, many of whom had traveled for 36 hours, roared their approval.Despite the festive atmosphere, there were signs, beyond the adverse weather, that cast doubt on whether Mr. Khan’s revolutionary drive could succeed. The crowd size fell far short of expectations — several thousand supporters, by most estimates, but not the billed “million man march.”And for much of Saturday, the message was dominated by Muhammad Tahir-ul Qadri, a Sufi cleric who had also led a crowd of protesters into the capital, but whom Mr. Khan had most likely regarded as an opening act.Instead, addressing a crowd of supporters camped at a major traffic junction, Mr. Qadri, whose party holds no seats in Parliament, offered a prolonged mix of inflammatory speech, folksy economics and lightly veiled authoritarianism.Mr. Qadri called on Mr. Sharif to cede power to a “national government” led by technocrats who, he said, should halve food prices, reduce income disparities and end terrorism. Mr. Khan, meanwhile, was being ridiculed on television news networks for having abandoned his supporters in the rain Friday night so he could rest at his luxurious villa outside the city.Earlier, Mr. Khan had promised that he would sleep at the protest site, and some of his supporters expressed irritation with him. Zubair Kiani, who had traveled from Chakothi in Kashmir, said he had spent the night on a wet sidewalk. “I have wrapped myself in the party flag to hide my dirty shirt,” he said.Mr. Khan rallied the crowd in a speech after dark Saturday evening, offering fiery criticism of Mr. Sharif, whom he accuses of election fraud, and positioning himself to take Mr. Sharif’s job. “Prime Minister Imran Khan will never lie to you,” he told cheering supporters.He said there could be dire consequences if his demands for midterm elections were not met, publicly warning Mr. Sharif that he could lose control of his supporters, and that they might storm the Parliament and the prime minister’s house.The government, having initially reacted swiftly to the protests, has taken a more relaxed approach in recent days, apparently hoping they will fizzle out. Containers that blocked the streets were removed, and a legal order that banned public protest was revoked.On Saturday, officials from Mr. Sharif’s party distributed food at Mr. Khan’s protest, in an attempt to show up their rival. Ahsan Iqbal, a senior cabinet minister, urged Mr. Khan and Mr. Qadri to “show flexibility” and ease their demand that Mr. Sharif step down.Mr. Khan has vowed to continue his sit-in until Mr. Sharif is gone; late Saturday, he urged people watching on television to come and join him on the streets. If those crowds do not materialize, Mr. Khan holds other potential levers. Reports suggested he was considering withdrawing from the Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa provincial government, which his Tehreek-e-Insaf party controls.But most analysts said the protests were unlikely to topple Mr. Sharif. “I don’t think a resignation is even remotely possible,” said Saroop Ijaz, a lawyer and commentator. Even so, Mr. Khan has succeeded in casting a pall on the 2013 election, which had been seen as a step forward for the country’s coup-prone political system.“This sets a dangerous precedent,” said Mr. Ijaz, referring to the Islamabad protest. “It delegitimizes the 2013 election, and risks undermining the broader democracy project. That’s what needs to be defended here.”