WASHINGTON —  Senate Democrats voted to retain Senator Harry Reid of Nevada and the other senior members of their leadership on Thursday, putting off for now the uncomfortable question of how to inject new energy into a party that many worry is failing to cultivate a new generation of leaders.The voting was done by secret ballot, but it was not unanimous, reflecting a divide within the party as it prepares to be the minority party on Capitol Hill for the first time since 2006.Concern about the need to elevate new faces and younger leaders was reflected in part in the decision Thursday to create a new but relatively small leadership role for Senator Elizabeth Warren, of Massachusetts. Ms. Warren, a folk hero of the left, will serve as an informal liaison to the party’s liberal base.“We’re going to do things a little differently,” Mr. Reid vowed after the vote.Senators who left the meeting, which stretched on for nearly four hours, described it as frank but cathartic, with plenty of soul-searching and introspection.“When you have an election like this, common sense says we need to change things,” said Senator Claire McCaskill of Missouri, one of the handful of Democrats who did not vote for Mr. Reid. “The voice was very loud and unmistakable,” she added. “To me that means changing leadership, and it was just that simple.”No senator rose to challenge Mr. Reid. But the public and private venting around Thursday’s vote was in large part the product of years of frustration by junior Democratic senators who had often felt like bit players since arriving in the Senate. Their discontent spilled over after last week’s losses. And on Thursday many of them complained that the party’s message of looking out for middle-class working families — based largely on a proposal to increase the minimum wage — was not breaking through to voters.Republicans had no such qualms on Thursday, electing Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky as majority leader for the next Congress, by unanimous vote. In the House, Representative John A. Boehner of Ohio was re-elected to lead the Republican conference, as was the rest of his leadership team.To celebrate the upcoming change of power, Senate Republicans, in a festive mood, ended their closed-door lunch with a sheet cake featuring a picture of the Capitol with red icing that read, “Under New Management.” Pointing to President Obama’s recent actions — his expansive call for regulating high-speed Internet providers akin to the way utilities are regulated, his newly announced climate deal with China and his expected executive orders on immigration — Mr. McConnell warned that the White House had taken the wrong lessons from Election Day.“I had maybe naïvely hoped the president would look at the results of the election and decide to come to the political center and do some business with us,” Mr. McConnell said. “I still hope he does at some point, but the early signs are not good.”For the Democrats, the sentiment many senators shared on Thursday reflected the views of their constituents: Congress is not working. “This was a change election,” said Senator Heidi Heitkamp, Democrat of North Dakota, who also did not vote for Mr. Reid. “I think that we needed to demonstrate that we heard the American public.”Through his highly centralized leadership approach, Mr. Reid minimized the role that individual senators could play in the legislative process, an approach that helped his most vulnerable Democrats avoid voting on issues that could hurt them but one that politically left them without much involvement.Over the last several months, a group of about 10 more junior Democratic senators began to more openly register their dissatisfaction with Mr. Reid’s approach, many of them former governors like Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Angus King, independent of Maine, who have been dismayed by the inactivity on Capitol Hill. Inside their meeting, senators complained that Congress had been dominated by gridlock. Senator King caucuses with the Democrats.“What was really brought up was the frustration that the whole body was dysfunctional,” said Senator Jon Tester of Montana, who was elected chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. “We’ve got to figure out a way to make it functional again to work for the American people,” Mr. Tester said, adding, “I think we take as much blame as the Republicans do.”Democrats also elected Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota to a leadership position on Thursday, making her the fourth woman in their senior ranks.Republicans also elected their own campaign chief for the 2016 elections, selecting Senator Roger Wicker of Mississippi to lead the National Republican Senatorial Committee.Mr. Reid spent the week meeting personally and talking on the phone with almost every member of his caucus.Mr. Manchin said that he and some of his fellow Democrats had tried to delay the leadership election by a week, in order to give the Democratic caucus more time to discuss their concerns, but their proposal was voted down.“The system has to work, whether it works for you or against you — that’s democracy,” Mr. Manchin said. “I’m saying open the process. We’ve heard people talk about this. I’ve never seen it in four years. So yes, I’m frustrated.”