MIAMI — Fortune is not often discriminatory when it chooses those it will ultimately smile upon. Eleven years ago, before he became the ink-swathed and enigmatic Birdman, Chris Andersen was merely a very tall tag-along, uncomfortably folded into the way back of my Volvo station wagon.He was along for a night out with Nikoloz Tskitishvili, a heralded rookie with the Denver Nuggets from the faraway Republic of Georgia. Driven to a Georgian restaurant in outer Brooklyn by a reporter and photographer working on a story about Tskitishvili’s improbable path to the N.B.A., the 6-foot-10 Andersen, then 24, lamented the drive through rush-hour traffic like an irascible child.“Remember that night?” he was asked Thursday.“That’s the past, I don’t,” he said.His claim was not entirely unbelievable. While Tskitishvili, the fifth pick of the 2003 draft, never cut it in the N.B.A., it has been a long, strange trip to consecutive finals for Andersen with Miami: from the way back to a comeback from a two-year drug suspension in 2006 to an increasingly futile battle against the formidable San Antonio skyline featuring Tim Duncan and Tiago Splitter in the N.B.A. finals.Unfortunately for the Heat, after being blown out at home in Game 3, they didn’t have a bounce back Thursday night and fell into a three-games-to-one hole. A ferocious two-handed put-back slam by the rising star Kawhi Leonard in the second quarter symbolized another clinical thrashing by the soaring Spurs, 107-86, in front of a disbelieving, booing crowd at American Airlines Arena.Duncan is that much closer to a fifth ring than James is to a third. The reigning superstars and their ring obsessions claim much of the attention but also fascinating is taking inventory of those who are suddenly blessed with an opportunity to win the prize that some of the very best — Patrick Ewing, Charles Barkley, et al. — did not.A year ago, Tracy McGrady, once a transcendent talent, was seconds away with the Spurs from a bejeweled conclusion to a career plagued by injury and bad timing. Then in Game 6 Ray Allen unleashed a thunderbolt from the right corner, and soon after McGrady left the scene empty-handed, the way Karl Malone exited after 19 years, 18 in Utah, a decade ago while failing in the finals with the feuding Shaq-and-Kobe Lakers.Allen first claimed championship legitimacy by teaming up with fellow established stars Kevin Garnett and Paul Pierce in Boston in 2008. The Celtics’ Big 3 was mimicked in Miami by LeBron James, Chris Bosh and the incumbent star Dwyane Wade.By next year, if we can lend credence to reports that the Heat are considering a heavily discounted Big 4 (based on the battering they took in Games 3 and 4, they might need a fifth) by adding Carmelo Anthony, we may have a whole new chapter on the lengths people will go to get what many players call the ’ship.Far more intriguing or endearing are those whose career narratives had seemed destined to lead anywhere but deep into June. Perfect example: if the Heat can manufacture a mighty rally to win a third straight title, who could suppress a smile at the sight of seldom-used center Greg Oden, so mired in misfortune from the start of his career, being handed a ring?Two years ago, Eddy Curry, of all star-crossed people, drew a lucky lottery ticket on Miami’s title team. When the Heat won the franchise’s first title in 2006 behind the young Wade, the joy on the face of Alonzo Mourning, who had returned after a kidney transplant to the franchise with which he had spent his prime, was indelible.In the 1990s, Michael Jordan routinely promised new teammates, especially the veterans, that he would get them their rings — quite possibly another of his legendary motivational tools. But in 1993, when the one-time Knicks teammates Darrell Walker and Trent Tucker wound up on Chicago’s bench, Tucker likened Jordan’s resolve to “almost like a father wants to provide for his kids.”Such care for teammates is obvious in Duncan’s on-court body language. It’s a quality that not all leading men on championship teams have, but for those who do, word travels fast.“I still remember when I got the call from my agent and he told me I got traded,” said the reserve forward Matt Bonner, in his eighth year with the Spurs and a member of their 2007 title team. “I was golfing, getting ready to hit the second shot on the fairway. My initial reaction was sadness because I enjoyed playing with Toronto. And then he followed that up by telling me I was going to the Spurs. I immediately thought about playing with Timmy and got really excited.”Duncan and Manu Ginobili were primary reasons shooting guard Marco Belinelli signed as a free agent this season with the Spurs. As a teenage pro on the junior team in Bologna, Italy, he had practiced with Ginobili, the senior team’s star. As an N.B.A. fan, he knew all about Duncan and the Spurs’ democracy.“I had a good year in Chicago, which was important for me and my confidence,” he said. “So the next step was to be with a team like San Antonio, where they could play for a championship.”Playing sparingly in the finals, he still hit what may turn out to be the Spurs’ biggest shot, halting a Heat rally late in the third quarter of Game 3. If San Antonio wins it all, Belinelli will have earned his first ring, as will the versatile Frenchman Boris Diaw and the reclamation project Danny Green and the shooting sparkplug Patty Mills and Thursday night’s garbage-time practitioners, Jeff Ayres, Cory Joseph and Aron Baynes.Spurs, 3-1. Game 5, Sunday night in San Antonio. Closing in on the hardware. Almost home. Ringleaders, all.