NEW YORK — At first, the new Jerry Seinfeld show seemed reassuringly like the old one. Spontaneous coffees with friends. Mindless chatter that occasionally verged on the hilariously brilliant. But look closer and you see that this show isn’t that show, and that new realities are upon us in America.The country has changed since “Seinfeld” signed off in May 1998, and Jerry has changed. His popular new online show, “Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee,” dispenses with the observational examination of regular life that defined the old “Seinfeld.” In its place is a show, well suited to an era dominated by talk of inequality and its effects, in which the über-successful hang out together, and our inability to relate becomes the point.Vanished is the “Seinfeld” that applied everyman scrutiny to everyday subjects: Can gifts be “regifted”? Why do dentists talk to you while opening your mouth? Instead, we watch pairs of rich guys chatting about the gilded joys of their lives and careers and cars, about the sealed-off world they inhabit and we don’t. As with watching royal weddings, we are supposed to bask in the reflected glow, not covet what they have.The democracy of observational humor has become, in Mr. Seinfeld’s reincarnation, an oligarchy of mutual admiration.“Your life has been one unbroken boulevard of green lights, hasn’t it?” the actor Alec Baldwin asks Mr. Seinfeld in one show, and Mr. Seinfeld cannot really disagree. They are sitting, as in every episode, in a coffee shop to which Mr. Seinfeld has driven his guest in a classic car chosen specially for the occasion.In that episode, the two men debate who worked harder to get where they are; speak of how much Mr. Baldwin admires Mr. Seinfeld’s home; make plans that if one of them produces the Oscars, the other should host it. But the spell of self-congratulation is briefly broken when the server offers Mr. Baldwin a sandwich with bread he doesn’t like.Under taunting from Mr. Baldwin, the server relents: “What do you want? We’ll give you what we have.” And this Mr. Baldwin repeats with a snicker, speaking not to the server but to Mr. Seinfeld and us, mocking the help, laughing at and not with. Later, Mr. Baldwin condescends to the woman some more: “You know what I need from you if you don’t mind, if it’s O.K.? May I have a fork, and some napkins?”That moment would have been almost unimaginable 20 years ago on “Seinfeld,” where the characters were self-absorbed more than entitled. As the men prepare to go, Mr. Baldwin says, “You realize we have to leave Rebecca a $1,000 tip.” This is what can pass for politeness among masters of the universe: humiliate, then compensate.In the episode with Mr. Seinfeld and David Letterman, the departing host of the “Late Show With David Letterman” on CBS, the guest seems uncomfortable being in an actual coffee shop, speaking within earshot of actual people.“Can we just ask these people to leave?” Mr. Letterman says.“We don’t own this place,” Mr. Seinfeld answers.Mr. Letterman allows himself a chuckle, then says, “We can change that, though, can’t we?”They can. Must be nice.“America is moving toward a caste society,” the Harvard political scientist Robert Putnam said recently. And this show from Mr. Seinfeld seems, in its own small way, to illustrate that drift.It is hardly Mr. Seinfeld’s fault that he’s less of a common man than he was before. What is telling is that his uncommonness is not marshaled on the show to help comedy’s commoners. Mr. Seinfeld, more than most, could use his show to give a platform to comics needing discovery. Instead, he packs it with fellow stars. They reminisce together about the days when they were nobodies and given glorious breaks, and seem almost unaware that there are nobodies today who could benefit from breaks of that very kind.But of course this is how the caste societies described by Mr. Putnam work: Those who least need the breaks are the ones who get them.Join an online conversation at  http://anand.ly and follow on  Twitter.com/anandwrites
