PARIS —  As tensions in Ukraine mount anew, veteran diplomats are starting to think quietly about a way out of the worst East-West crisis since the end of the Cold War.It may seem a poor time to imagine a revamped security architecture for Europe when a frail cease-fire in eastern Ukraine is violated daily. The United States and the European Union have imposed three waves of sanctions on Moscow over its annexation of Crimea and its support for pro-Russian separatists in southeastern Ukraine — to no avail.Yet despite President Vladimir V. Putin’s diatribes against the West, neither Russia nor Europe has an interest in a long-term confrontation. The current conflict has already damaged both sides’ economies and could undermine stability across Eastern Europe.As a result, wise diplomats like the former German ambassador Wolfgang Ischinger, chairman of the Munich Security Conference, and Igor Y. Yurgens, chairman of the Institute of Contemporary Development in Moscow, who is close to Russia’s prime minister, Dmitri A. Medvedev, are scouring the diplomatic handbook for a possible exit.While Mr. Ischinger calls Russia’s behavior in Ukraine unacceptable and supports sanctions, he believes that strengthening the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the intergovernmental group of 57 countries, could help Europe move beyond the crisis. In the short run, he wants an international contact group comprising Russia, the United States, the European Union and the Ukrainian government to oversee the implementation of the cease-fire accords signed in Minsk in September between Ukraine and the pro-Russian rebels.In the longer term, Mr. Ischinger said, Serbia, which will take over O.S.C.E.’s chairmanship in 2015, and Germany, which will lead the organization in 2016, should work to develop a new charter on European security.Under a security plan put forth by Mr. Medvedev weeks before a brief war between Russia and Georgia in 2008, no country or alliance operating in the European-Atlantic region would be entitled to strengthen its own security to the detriment of other nations.Mr. Yurgens, who has criticized Mr. Putin’s policy in Ukraine, said Mr. Medvedev’s initiative deserved a more constructive response than it had received.The West brushed off the proposal at the time because it seemed a blatant attempt to give Russia a veto over decisions by the NATO alliance, such as admitting new members or deploying American missile defenses in Europe.Mr. Putin has since followed the opposite route: taking unilateral military action in Crimea and establishing a Eurasian Union, which includes Belarus and Kazakhstan, as a Russian-centered counterweight to the European Union.The struggle for Ukraine was set off by Kiev’s decision to move toward Europe and not join the Eurasian Union.If some people are looking now to O.S.C.E., it is because the organization was created during the Cold War to provide a framework for limiting and channeling geopolitical competition.Created in 1975 during a pan-European summit meeting that took place in a period of détente in the East-West conflict, the Helsinki Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe enshrined top ground rules including sovereignty, territorial integrity and chapters on human rights and economic cooperation.It set a framework for talks that eventually led to a treaty limiting conventional armed forces in Europe, one that also included measures to build trust between nations, such as giving countries prior notice of military exercises and allowing them to send observers.When the Cold War ended, 34 nations solemnly signed the Charter of Paris for a New Europe, codifying commitments to sovereignty and territorial integrity but also democracy, human rights, the rule of law and economic liberty.“We need to create the conditions for some repeat operation of the Paris Charter of 1990,” Mr. Ischinger said, noting that Mr. Putin had praised the positive role of the O.S.C.E. in the Ukraine crisis.The 1990 document pledged “a new quality in our security relations while fully respecting each other’s freedom of choice in that respect.” That was taken in the West as an acceptance by Moscow that former Soviet bloc states were free to join NATO and the European Union if they chose.After 12 central European states joined NATO, though, Mr. Putin sought to draw a red line against any further eastward expansion of the alliance to include Ukraine or Georgia. Russian diplomats have praised the example of Finland, which remained neutral and friendly toward Moscow in security terms while pursuing economic integration into Europe.In Western eyes, Moscow’s military seizure of Crimea was a flagrant breach of O.S.C.E. principles. In Moscow’s view, moving into Crimea was about protecting the overwhelmingly ethnic Russian population. It was to prevent its Crimean naval base of Sevastopol from falling into NATO’s hands.The Ukraine conflict has reminded governments of the utility of O.S.C.E., the only security forum connecting all European and North American states. At best, it serves to build bridges and save face. At worst, it is a talking shop that is paralyzed by having to make decisions with the agreement of all 57 members. It performs tasks like observing elections and monitoring cease-fires, but Moscow has barred O.S.C.E. observers from Crimea.How a revised European security charter could stabilize the countries between Russia and NATO is unclear. Many Western officials privately say Crimea is lost, though their governments will not accept that officially.The West is unlikely to formally renounce letting Ukraine and Georgia into NATO one day if those countries meet the criteria and want to join. But many Western officials now acknowledge that this day will be far off, if ever.Mr. Ischinger, who served for more than a decade with Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the West German foreign minister who was a tireless promoter of O.S.C.E. over deep American suspicions, said there was a precedent for dealing with such problems.“The Helsinki Final Act didn’t settle the final status of Germany or the Baltic states,” he said. “But it did spell out that they couldn’t be settled by force.”Paul Taylor is a Reuters correspondent. 