JAKARTA, Indonesia —  Slumped back in a black swivel chair in Jakarta’s colonial-era governor’s office, Indonesia’s president-elect looked weary.He does not take office until Monday, but already Joko Widodo faces a hostile opposition coalition in Parliament that has vowed to undermine him at every turn and threatened to investigate him for corruption. Depressing economic indicators include declining growth and an unexpected spike in unemployment, while a national fuel subsidy sucks tens of billions of dollars out of the country’s state budget. And no sooner does he take office than he is expected to attend four major international conferences, starting with the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Beijing.But pushing aside a briefing paper, he broke into smile.“Look at my face,” he said with a cackling laugh and a sudden burst of energy. “Do I look worried?”Indeed, in an interview last week in his private office he seemed remarkably relaxed and confident, at times carefully explaining the inevitability of his policies with the patience of a schoolteacher, at others dismissing complex problems with a wave of the hand. Parliament, for instance, was not a concern, because he will control a majority there “within six months,” he said.Whether or not his presidency conforms to these expectations, and Indonesia’s fractious politics has a way of upending a politician’s best-laid plans, he has already set a new tone for the office and what he calls his “people-centric policies.”Tall, thin and unassuming, Mr. Joko, 53, has a laid-back style and a face he jokingly says resembles that of a village street-food vendor more than the incoming president of the world’s fourth-largest nation.A former carpenter and furniture exporter who was born in a slum in Central Java Province, he will be the first president in Indonesian history not to emerge from the country’s political elite or the ranks of former army generals. His July election over a former general and son-in-law of the dictator Suharto was characterized by many as a choice between a common man and a throwback to Indonesia’s authoritarian past.High office has not changed his humble habits. As governor of Jakarta, he eschewed tailor-made suits and ties in favor of plain white button-down shirts and dark slacks, an outfit his presidential campaign team trumpeted in a campaign billboard as costing less than $30. He frequently does not wear socks with his simple loafers, and has given interviews barefoot.He drew national attention for his daily walking tours through traditional markets and slum areas, where he would talk with residents about bread-and-butter issues such as health care, education and traffic, a kind of direct public contact alien to Indonesia’s traditionally aloof politicians.“When I go on the ground and ask the people, they feel that the elite politicians fight and don’t pay attention to them,” he said in the interview. “So I think this is our opportunity to send a message to the people that we will pay more attention to them, we will give them good programs.”Some of this he can accomplish without Parliament’s cooperation. During his first week in office, he plans to nationalize a “smart card” program for free health care and financial support for basic education for tens of millions of poor Indonesians, a program that was popular when he was a mayor in Central Java Province and governor of Jakarta. He said he expected the first cards to be mailed across the country by Nov. 1.He has promised clean, professional government, and has rejected the longstanding practice of trading support for cabinet seats. Such a pledge could make building a governing majority next to impossible, but Mr. Joko acknowledged during the interview that new parties joining his coalition could still be awarded cabinet seats. But he said that they could be filled only by competent political appointees or professional technocrats who are party members.“I think the main criteria is integrity and then an ability to work with me for the good of our country,” he said.One major party, the Islamic-based United Development Party, is expected to abandon the opposition in the coming days, and analysts said they expected at least one other opposition party to switch sides eventually and give Mr. Joko a majority.Meanwhile, the opposition has not squandered its moment in the majority. As Mr. Joko watched helplessly from the sidelines last month, it pushed through legislation eliminating direct elections for provincial governors, district chiefs and mayors, a move analysts said was aimed at preventing a political outsider like Mr. Joko from ever winning the presidency again.Here again Mr. Joko was confident he would ultimately triumph. The vast majority of Indonesians support direct elections, he said, and he dismissed the opposition’s argument that they were a waste of money.“Democracy is about listening to the people,” he said. “So when the opposition wants to change that and people don’t want it, then of course I think the people are on my side.”He may have more trouble following through on his plans to reduce or eliminate the national fuel subsidy, which would require parliamentary approval. The subsidy costs Indonesia more than $20 billion a year, more than health care and social services combined, and according to the World Bank, benefits the wealthy more than the poor.During the campaign, Mr. Joko suggested eliminating the subsidy completely by gradually raising the price of gasoline over a four years.But the subsidy is popular with voters and lawmakers.The departing president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, tried raising fuel prices two years ago, prompting an embarrassing revolt among members of his own coalition. The plan was quashed in a raucous session of Parliament as student and labor groups outside clashed with riot police on live national television.Last year, however, Mr. Yudhoyono’s government was able to push through an amended budget that raised fuel prices to 53 cents a liter from 37 cents.Mr. Joko said he would counter the expected opposition by directly explaining to the public that the savings from raising gasoline prices would be used to help them.“We want to channel it from consumption to productive activity,” he said. “Irrigation for farmers, subsidies for fertilizers to farmers, seeds to the farmers, subsidies for small and micro businesses in villages, and subsidies to fishermen for refrigerators and boat engines.”He said the savings would also support infrastructure, transportation and health care. The people would support him, he said, once they understood.“It’s very important to explain to the people so they can accept our decisions,” he said.