I’m curious to see what happens Sunday during an otherwise meaningless game between Washington and the St. Louis Rams in the nation’s capital.In August, some Washington players were the first in the N.F.L. to publicly protest the fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager by a white police officer in Ferguson, Mo. With residents and the police in a tense standoff in Ferguson’s streets over the shooting of Michael Brown, safety Ryan Clark and several other Washington players emerged from the stadium tunnel during introductions for a preseason game with their hands raised and palms forward. The “hands up, don’t shoot” gesture was a show of solidarity with protesters.Last Sunday, days after a grand jury declined to indict the officer, five St. Louis players entered the field for a game making the same hands-up gesture, another show of solidarity after a new round of protests.The St. Louis Police Officers Association immediately called for the players involved to be disciplined and for the team and the N.F.L. to apologize. The association condemned the display, saying it was “profoundly disappointed” with the Rams players “who chose to ignore the mountains of evidence” that led to the decision not to indict the officer, Darren Wilson.The players did not ignore mountains of evidence; they merely disagreed with the decision. One of them, receiver Kenny Britt, said, “I don’t want the people in the community to feel like we turned a blind eye to it.”Asked what he hoped his actions would accomplish, Britt said: “What would I like to see happen? Change in America.”In August, the Washington players who demonstrated were expressing concern that justice would not be served. On Sunday in St. Louis, the Rams players, like the demonstrators, were frustrated because in their view, justice had not been served. The N.F.L. and the Rams wisely decided against fining or otherwise disciplining the players.Sports is no longer an intersection of American culture but a peril-filled superhighway. Professional football and basketball and their top-tier college counterparts are wildly popular industries dominated — for the moment — by young African-American athletes. Teams must do a balancing act as never before to facilitate a relationship between those athletes and the fans and sponsors who would rather see them than hear them. And there are athletes who prefer to be seen solely as football players, agnostic on social issues.A few days after the Washington demonstration, Philadelphia Eagles linebacker Trent Cole told me that he would stay away from public demonstrations.“As players, we’re in front of cameras all the time,” Cole said at the time. “People can look at it the wrong way; some people can look at it the right way. It could be positive; it could be negative. Me, personally, I wouldn’t take that chance.”I hope the action of the St. Louis and Washington players will embolden other athletes to use their visibility to shed light on sensitive issues.Rather than being silenced by money, many young athletes have been empowered to speak up.Last season, top N.B.A. players loudly protested the continued presence in the league of Donald Sterling, whose privately taped racist comments led to his ouster as the owner of the Los Angeles Clippers. In 2012, some high-profile N.B.A. players wore hoodies in the aftermath of the killing of another black teenager, Trayvon Martin.In protesting the actions of the police in Ferguson, the five Rams players tapped into concerns that go beyond the black community. More citizens have expressed concern that their liberty is being threatened by the military mind-set and shoot-first-ask-later tactics of police forces becoming increasingly militarized with weapons and equipment.Like it or not, the players’ brief demonstration struck a much-needed chord.Last week, at the Presidential Medal of Freedom ceremony at the White House, I spoke with Michael Goodman, whose brother, Andrew, was one of three young people murdered in Mississippi in 1964 while there to register disenfranchised black voters. The ceremony was held hours before the grand jury revealed its decision not to indict Wilson, but 50 years later, Goodman noted a link between the two events.“We’ve got to remind ourselves to take responsibility to keep democracy intact,” Goodman said. “It’s a struggle. It’s work. It’s constant. It doesn’t quit.”But given the reaction in St. Louis, it is likely that the Rams players, and players throughout the N.F.L., are finished with demonstrations.“I think we kind of got our point across,” tight end Jared Cook, one of the five Rams who participated in Sunday’s demonstration, told The Associated Press on Wednesday. “Especially now, I think the world understands a little more why we did it.”It would certainly be stunning to see another one from Washington’s players. Any franchise that insists on keeping its racist nickname will probably not tolerate any more demonstrations against perceived racism by its players. Spike the ball after a touchdown; do a jig in the end zone. But no political demonstrations.On Monday, Rams Coach Jeff Fisher addressed the news media and spoke for most coaches — and most players, for that matter — when he said he preferred to compartmentalize politics and sports.“It’s my personal opinion, and I firmly believe, that it’s important that I keep sports and politics separate,” Fisher said. “I’m a head coach. I’m not a politician, an activist or an expert on societal issues.”Fisher said that he would speak to his players about their decision to protest, but that those discussions — unlike the players’ protest — would be private.It’s encouraging that the St. Louis players have not backed down from the stance they took. Cook told the A.P. that despite the threats he has received, he and his teammates had no misgivings about having done the “hands up, don’t shoot” gesture and would do it again.He conceded that the players could have taken a less controversial stand.“We could have, absolutely,” Cook said. “But would we? Absolutely not.”Fisher wants to keep politics and social issues separate. Fans argue that they go to athletic events to escape.But in a society often defined by violence and combustible social issues, there is no escape.