Earlier this month, Chris Christie was standing in the parking lot of MJ’s Restaurant, in Marion, Iowa, holding a news conference. Earlier that day, a Malaysia Airlines jet had been shot down in Ukraine; Israel was launching its ground invasion into Gaza. And here was Christie — a tell-it-like-it-is, straight-talking, no-nonsense Jersey guy — telling about 60 members of the media what he really thought. “Governor Branstad is a role model for me,” Christie gushed, referring to his 67-year-old counterpart from Iowa. Terry Branstad, who is seeking his sixth term in November, is hoping to become the longest-serving governor in the nation’s history. And Christie — who referred to Branstad as a “dear friend,” a “legend” and someone who embodies “what public service is all about” — hoped to perpetuate his dynasty. In fact, he even offered to return to Iowa, over and over, “as often as Governor Branstad wants me to.”Branstad, who was standing a few feet away in MJ’s parking lot, does not quite present as such an exalted figure. He’s a mustachioed wisp of a sound-bite machine, who is prone to rambling and repeating himself at Olympian levels, even by politician standards. But he has channeled the fits of self-importance that befall many politicians in Iowa and New Hampshire into a larger ambition. Iowa may be a flat, landlocked state with six electoral votes, but under Branstad’s stewardship, it has become the country’s premier tourist destination for political brown-nosers and day-tripping presidential hopefuls. As a slow-moving formation of furry boom mikes followed Christie into a mosh pit of supporters inside the diner, Branstad began to enumerate to me his other “dear friends”: the Texas governor, Rick Perry; the Wisconsin governor, Scott Walker; Representative Paul Ryan, among others.If there’s one thing every Republican presidential candidate can agree upon, it is that Branstad represents the peak of American leadership, if not the pinnacle of all human achievement. Homage must be paid. Perry said that what Branstad “has done in this state is an example that we want to take across the country.” Ryan said Branstad embodied the qualities “that people in Washington can learn from,” and Walker listed Branstad as one of the people that he respects the most. Branstad humbly agrees. “We want Iowa to be the envy of the whole nation,” he told me in the parking lot. “Not just because we have the first-in-the-nation caucuses.” (No, of course not; it’s totally natural for the governor of New Jersey to check out the cows here in the middle of July.) “Iowa is going in the right direction,” Branstad continued, “and the rest of the country is going in the wrong direction.”Political pilgrimages to Iowa started in the ’70s. Trips to the Empire of Branstadia began a little later, in 1985, when Vice President George Herbert Walker Bush became the first national politician to show up in Altoona for the then-young governor’s birthday party. The growing fuss over Branstad’s birthday — Nov. 17 — is itself a telling indicator of how far the circus has come. Paul Ryan showed up at the governor’s party last year and presented him with a customized Wisconsin cheesehead. Marco Rubio came the previous year; a year earlier, a battalion of 2012 candidates trekked to Altoona, including Michele Bachmann, who came equipped with a fake mustache, and Herman Cain, who recited a poem.Nothing has an off-season anymore. We start hearing about the N.F.L. draft right after the Super Bowl, and the buzz for next year’s Oscar hopefuls begins right after the Academy Awards. This is especially true of presidential politics. As Christie’s visit suggests, the Iowa Disneyland is no longer limited to caucus years or the months preceding them. Perry, Bobby Jindal, Rick Santorum, Ted Cruz and Rand Paul have already passed through town this year. Jeb Bush hosted a fund-raiser for King Branstad in Florida. “The caucus campaign is now a permanent state,” says Judy Davidson of Bettendorf, the Republican chairwoman of Scott County. “I was in Hobby Lobby the other day,” she told me, “and I was noticing that they were selling Christmas decorations already. I was saying to someone, ‘It keeps starting earlier and earlier.’ It’s like Christmas in July here, or Caucus in July.” That’s July 2014, a full 19 months before the next caucuses.It would be one thing if all of this early activity and attention in Iowa resulted in a smarter electorate, better candidates or a more authentic version of democracy. But in general, the quaint “retail” settings of Iowa diners and New Hampshire living rooms are treated mostly as media sound stages, places where reporters report on how many other reporters showed up (see above). As a result, these scenes have become backdrops for set pieces that blur into an anesthetizing noise: So-and-so has been to Iowa five times; some other so-and-so is “thinking about” running for president; and here’s yet another picture of yet another so-and-so looking a voter right in the eyes and telling him the truth about something or other, as the discerning voters here insist.Over the years, Iowans have leveraged their first-in-nation caucus to promote the notion that they are wiser than the rest of us.“If the rest of America had been as smart as Iowa folks, we wouldn’t be in the shape we’re in today,” said the former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee, a once and possibly future presidential candidate who won the Iowa Republican caucuses in 2008. And if the rest of the country thought like Iowa folks, Huckabee might be in the White House now — if not the 2012 Iowa winner, President Santorum.After his visit to Marion, I watched Christie speak at another Branstad fund-raiser, at the Mississippi Valley Fairgrounds in Davenport. Christie had taken the stage to an upbeat, swingy rendition of “Born in the U. S. A.,” a paean to his idol, Bruce Springsteen, even though the song is in fact a bleak lament about the plight of Vietnam veterans. Again, Christie waxed effusive about Branstad and spoke of how star-struck he was when he first became governor of New Jersey and realized that the Iowa governor actually knew who he was. They have since become “dear friends” and have much in common, beyond their abiding love for Iowa. He also has another dear friend, the Iowa lieutenant governor, Kim Reynolds — and by the way, Christie pointed out, the lieutenant governor of New Jersey is also named Kim (Guadagno). They are practically the same person!“It makes me feel really good to be able to get on the airplane and go home tonight knowing that I made a lot of new friends,” Christie said, wrapping up. He made a few more friends on the way out the door and then left. That weekend, Branstad looked forward to welcoming his great friend Rick Perry.