BANGKOK — The Election Commission of Thailand on Thursday cast doubt on elections tentatively set for July as proceedings to impeach the ousted prime minister took another step forward, sharpening a political crisis that has already left the country with a hamstrung government.The removal of Yingluck Shinawatra as prime minister on Wednesday on the grounds that she had illegally transferred a civil servant to another post was followed Thursday by separate proceedings to impeach her in connection with a farm subsidy program, a process that could result in Ms. Yingluck being banned from politics. The National Anti-Corruption Commission, which brought the latest proceedings, did not clarify how Ms. Yingluck could be impeached from an office that she no longer holds.The Constitutional Court’s decision to remove Ms. Yingluck and the move to impeach her have emboldened supporters of the opposition, who disrupted elections in February and continue to campaign for a suspension of democracy and for an appointed government.The Election Commission, which has been accused of sympathizing with the protest movement, said Thursday that it was not sure elections could be held on July 20, as it had previously proposed.“We may have to postpone it,” Phuchong Nutawong, the election commission’s secretary general, told reporters.Backed by the Bangkok establishment, antigovernment protesters are battling to eradicate the influence of Ms. Yingluck’s brother, Thaksin Shinawatra, a former prime minister and the founder of a political movement that has won every election since 2001, drawing its strength from populous agrarian provinces in the north.Thailand’s economy has slowed significantly since the latest crisis began six months ago. Both sides are warning about the prospect of increased violence.Ms. Yingluck’s impeachment case centers on a costly policy to subsidize rice farmers that the anticorruption commission said the government had mismanaged.Like the court decision removing Ms. Yingluck from office, which legal experts have criticized for being a disproportionately harsh punishment for irregularities in the transfer of a civil servant, the decision to begin impeachment proceedings appeared to some to be rushed and based on debatable legal reasoning.Vicha Mahakun, the spokesman of the National Anti-Corruption Commission, said Ms. Yingluck was being held accountable for damage to the country, not for corruption.“Even though at this stage it appears that the evidence is not clear that the accused took part in corruption or whether she allowed corruption or not, the accused did not govern the country as announced in Parliament,” Mr. Vicha said.The policy, which paid farmers twice the market price for rice, had resulted in “devastating damage to the country” and was an opportunity for fraud, Mr. Vicha said. The government has accumulated debt totaling 695 billion baht, or about $21 billion, to finance the scheme, according to experts, although some of that debt will be recouped when the government sells its rice stocks.Ms. Yingluck’s party has accused the courts and independent agencies such as the anticorruption commission of being part of a conspiracy to remove her government from power.The caretaker government is headed by Niwattumrong Boonsongpaisan, a former business executive who was hastily named acting prime minister on Wednesday after Ms. Yingluck’s removal. On Thursday, he was also put in charge of the finance ministry. Because of its caretaker status, the government is barred by law from making major funding decisions.While some commentators have said fresh elections are the only way out of the crisis, both the antigovernment protest movement and their allies in the opposition Democrat Party have threatened to block or boycott the elections, which they would likely lose.Chavanond Intarakomalyasut, a spokesman for the Democrat Party, which has lost every election since 1995, warned Wednesday that elections could be “bloody” if they go ahead in July.“Most people are not confident that the July 20 election will be held or if they are held, they will not be accepted,” he said.As it has numerous times during months of antigovernment demonstrations, the Election Commission on Thursday showed no urgency in setting a concrete date for fresh elections.Mr. Phuchong, the election commission’s secretary general, told reporters that the body was unable to agree to the government’s request for a meeting in the coming days because members of the commission planned to attend a plowing ritual on Friday, an annual ceremony that marks the start of the rice growing season.The commission said the earliest that it could meet to discuss who had the legal authority to call elections was next Wednesday.“The Election Commission is not standing still,” Mr. Phuchong said. “But we have to invite all sides to deliberate.”Thailand has not had a fully functioning government since December, when Ms. Yingluck dissolved Parliament and called for elections. After antigovernment protesters disrupted the February elections, a court ruled that the vote had been unconstitutional because of the problems.The movement seeking to overthrow the government said that it considered Ms. Yingluck’s removal from office on Wednesday only a partial victory and that it planned to continue its campaign for an appointed government that would carry out unspecified reforms.Both the United Nations and Washington have voiced concern over the Thai crisis. Jen Psaki, the State Department spokeswoman, said at a briefing that a resolution to the country’s crisis “should include elections and an elected government.”A spokesman for Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general, urged all sides to show “utmost restraint and show full respect for democratic principles.”A senior police official said Thursday that at least 15,000 security officers would be called up to maintain order as supporters and opponents of the government prepare for separate demonstrations in the coming days. The movement vowing to overthrow the government plans a public gathering on Friday, while government supporters said they would hold a demonstration on Saturday.More than 20 people have been killed in political violence during the six months of antigovernment demonstrations. On Wednesday night, after Ms. Yingluck’s removal from office, explosions damaged a bank, a hospital and the home of a Constitutional Court judge who had ruled against Ms. Yingluck.