Summer Reading IssueTo the Editor:I had to smile when I saw the cover of the Book Review’s Summer Reading issue (June 1). I wonder whether younger readers recognized this parody of the ubiquitous advertisement for the Charles Atlas bodybuilding program that appeared in magazines and comic books back when I was a teenager in the 1950s. I still resist reading from a Nook or Kindle, and no matter how heavy they are, I remain loyal to hardcover books!RUTH L. KRUGMANAVON, CONN.◆To the Editor:Thank you for Charlie Rubin’s concise and convincing review-essay about thrillers. It is a breath of fresh air for thriller lovers looking for suggestions beyond the best-seller list and familiar authors.SHARON BROWNNEW YORK◆To the Editor:I was glad to see two pages of the Summer Reading issue devoted to science fiction, since you no longer cover the genre regularly, as you used to. Unfortunately, the reviewer didn’t like three of the five books chosen for review.As Michael Chabon and Junot Díaz have noted, speculative fiction doesn’t usually get much respect in the literary world. But there are some good writers working in this category, like China Miéville, David Mitchell and Chabon himself. I’d suggest you bring back your sci-fi column, but open it up to all sorts of speculative fiction, including graphic novels. There’s some great stuff out there, if you look for it.STEVE SECHIGREENWICH, CONN.◆Bee SeasonTo the Editor:I was reading Emma Straub’s review of Laline Paull’s novel, “The Bees” (May 25), tolerating the relentless anthropomorphizing of the honeybee, until I got to her suggestion that “forward-thinking teachers of high school environmental science and biology will add ‘The Bees’ to their syllabuses in a flash.” Then I’d had enough.That is just the wrong advice. Bees are wonderful creatures, and their social organization and efficient decision-making ability, developed over millions of years, is indeed a marvel to behold. They are not little people. Yes, males serve no purpose but to breed with a queen, and 25-30 of them do so in succession, until she is filled with their sperm and can return to the hive to use it to fertilize her eggs as she lays them (if they are to become worker bees; eggs laid to become drone bees are not fertilized).Unlike the male “sex fiends” mentioned in Straub’s review, males in fact mate only once, if they mate at all, and they die afterward. They do not produce food; they do nothing other than propel the genetic strains of the colony into future colonies, offspring of a well-mated queen. Yet without drones, honeybees would not last very long as a species. I should add that the drones are really needed only in the summer months, and should they remain virgins into the fall, they are usually kicked out of the hive and starve to death.This winter took a heavy toll on honeybees in the Northeast, and I had a few hives with bees like “Flora 717.” This is known as a “laying worker” phenomenon, and it means the hive is doomed. Not only are all the offspring of laying workers drones who produce no food, but they are haploid drones at that, since they are produced without the mating that provides for the exchange of DNA information that normally enriches the new colony. A “laying worker” colony can generally be combined only with a strong existing colony that has a fertile queen.Thomas Seeley of Cornell University has done excellent research on honeybee behavior, particularly the process by which a swarm of bees embarks upon a journey to decide the location of a new home. Seeley’s book “Honeybee Democracy” deserves a role in a high school syllabus much more than a book with as little relevance to biology as Noah’s ark has to the study of evolution.CURTIS CROWELLHIGHTSTOWN, N.J.The writer is treasurer of the New Jersey Beekeepers Association.