Get With the ProgramTo the Editor:In the March 2 issue, not one but two authors — Porochista Khakpour in her review of “Boy, Snow, Bird” and Taiye Selasi in her review of “Dust” — briefly detoured from the business at hand to make denigrating remarks about M.F.A. creative writing programs. These gratuitous, tiresome and increasingly common comments typically suggest that graduate work in creative writing has produced a legion of novelist-automatons, all of them publishing insipid and similar work. I have never heard the same aspersions made against painters, actors or musicians: Oh, another Juilliard graduate — his fingering on the cello is identical to everyone else’s.Perhaps apprentice writers are alone in attracting this sort of critique because readers enjoy the idea of a writer suffering in order to garner material: Better that a would-be novelist stack boxes in a warehouse or wait tables rather than be granted two to three years (often funded) to concentrate on her work.My own alma mater, Cornell University, granted M.F.A.s in creative writing to Junot Díaz, Lorrie Moore, Melissa Bank, NoViolet Bulawayo, Téa Obreht, Stewart O’Nan, Susan Choi, Diane Ackerman, Melanie Thernstrom and many others. Cookie-cutter workshop writers? Really?JULIE SCHUMACHERST. PAULThe writer is a professor in the creative writing program and the English department at the University of Minnesota.◆‘Not I’To the Editor:In his review of Joachim Fest’s “Not I: Memoirs of a German Childhood” (March 2), Barry Gewen neglects to explain the powerful significance of the book’s title. “Not I” comes from the instructions of Fest’s conservative Catholic father, Johannes, to his sons to write down and remember the following Latin phrase: Etiam si omnes — ego non (Even if all others do — I will not), which comes from the Gospel of St. Matthew. There, Peter reassures Jesus that he will never reject him. For Johannes Fest, sincere religious faith would see the family through the nightmare of Nazism and provide a meaningful rationale for his own resistance to the regime.SAM I. GELLENSNEW YORKThe writer is the assistant director of the Jay and Jeanie Schottenstein honors program, Yeshiva University.◆To the Editor:Barry Gewen’s review of Joachim Fest’s memoir reminds readers that the influential Jewish-German émigré philosopher Leo Strauss had a youthful attraction to the extreme right in Weimar Germany. But by 1933, when Strauss wrote the letter cited by Gewen, he had already started to distance himself from that point of view, regarding the principles of the right as still useful, however, for a conservative rebellion against Hitler. In my book “Leo Strauss: Man of Peace,” which will be published later this year, I show that Strauss remained troubled throughout his life by his early misstep toward the right, or what he came to call “German nihilism.” In many mature works that addressed extreme politics, Strauss tackled at its deepest roots the intellectual mind-set that seduced him in his 20s; he took seriously the sources of the seductiveness, diagnosing and deconstructing them with Socratic-style philosophical critique. He ended up with a case for liberal democracy based upon sober rationalism rather than idealistic enthusiasm, but also in a reaffirmation of his allegiance to and shared fate with his own people, the Jews.ROBERT HOWSENEW YORKThe writer is a professor of international law at New York University Law School.◆Academic BooksTo the Editor:Every week I open The New York Times Book Review looking for reviews of books published by academic presses in areas of interest to me, and most weeks I am disappointed. As a professor of history, I would argue that there are plenty of academics publishing well-researched, beautifully written books, but there are almost no mechanisms to bring those books to a wider audience. Marketing efforts are minimal, and unless one has a presence on cable TV it is almost impossible for academic authors to reach popular audiences, no matter how topical their subjects or exciting their prose.The Book Review could help to connect academic authors to wider audiences by reviewing more university press books; publicizing Choice magazine’s list of outstanding academic titles or creating its own; and creating a university press best-seller list (hardcover, paperback and digital). Shouldn’t the Book Review’s multiple best-­seller lists include one for scholarly books that readers would find intellectually stimulating?JACOB S. DORMANLAWRENCE, KAN.The writer, a professor in the history department at the University of Kansas, is the author of “Chosen People: The Rise of American Black Israelite Religions.”◆Husband-Hunting in the WestTo the Editor:In her review of “The Fishing Fleet: Husband-Hunting in the Raj” (March 2), Alida Becker noted that the main motivation for sending all those Englishwomen to India was to provide brides for the British soldiers and bureaucrats stationed there.Readers might be interested to know that in 1869, Wyoming became the first territory to grant women the right to vote. It did so in part to attract women to a place where men generally outnumbered their female counterparts by as much as 6 to 1.EDWARD S. HOCHMANNEW YORK