The worn mound of stones is circled by small American flags duct-taped to a chipped metal railing, on the eastern edge of Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx. It is a reminder of the Native Americans who fell in 1778 while fighting with the patriots in the Revolutionary War.But these days, the memorial is at the center of another battle.A temporary dog run next to the memorial has drawn complaints from some Bronx historians and Native Americans who say that it is an insult to those who fought and died on a broad swath of land that today includes the park. In recent weeks, these critics have demanded that the dog run be moved farther from the memorial. They have mobilized against a plan by city parks officials and community residents to replace the existing pen, which has been there since 2009, with a $400,000 enclosure that would be permanent.“You wouldn’t have them side by side if this was the Vietnam War Memorial, the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier or the Martin Luther King Memorial,” said Thomas X. Casey, who is the secretary for two Bronx historical groups, the Kingsbridge Historical Society and the East Bronx History Forum. “You’d set up for memorial events and right behind you, you’d have dogs urinating and defecating. We consider it a sacred place to come and have a service.”The battle over the dog run has pitted those who want to honor the past against parks officials and local residents who see it as a community resource, and has spurred passionate and even philosophical debates over how city parkland should be used. The actual burial ground of the Native Americans is not at the memorial, but is believed by historians to be at an unidentified site elsewhere in the park.“I have nothing against history,” said Dennis Riley, 53, a carpet store owner who takes his 4-year-old pit bull, Diesel, to the dog run every day. “But it’s hundreds of years ago. It’s time to move on.”Many of these dog owners say the current site is safe and convenient, and in an ideal location, under trees that offer shade on hot summer days and near street lamps that provide light in the evenings. Some suggest that the Native Americans had their own dogs, and that if anything, the new dog run — the result of years of community input and planning — would be a fitting use of the land. “The Native Americans were fighting for the establishment of a democracy, and that’s precisely how the dog run came to be,” said Shawn Guffey, 36, a graduate student in developmental psychology. “This is what they died for.”The dog run would be the latest addition to Van Cortlandt Park, a 1,146-acre expanse of woodlands and fields in the northwest Bronx that is home to the nation’s first municipal golf course, a world-renowned cross-country course and a complex of cricket fields. Its historic treasures include the Van Cortlandt House Museum, a stately Georgian-style home where George Washington stayed at least twice during the Revolutionary War.In June 1906, the Bronx chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution erected a stone monument that pays tribute to “Chief Nimham and seventeen Stockbridge Indians,” who were part of a larger group of Native Americans killed by British soldiers in a bloody battle on Aug. 31, 1778, that became known as the Stockbridge Indian Massacre. According to historians, their bodies were left in the fields and partly devoured by dogs before local farmers and residents buried them in an area later called Indian Field.Mr. Casey and others have also protested that the temporary dog run — as the permanent one eventually will — sits between the memorial and a historic road, where they say Native Americans once scouted for British troops and valiantly fought them during the war.“Does it have to be at this spot?” asked Chief Harry Wallace, a lawyer who is the elected chief of the Unkechaug Nation, which has a 250-member reservation on Long Island. “There are so many more appropriate places for the dog run.”Philip Abramson, a spokesman for the parks department, said in an email that the site had been identified based on the preferences of local dog owners, discussions with community residents and proximity to residential housing. He added that two other locations were briefly tested. One was near a ball field, which dog owners found too isolated. Another one, behind a playground, raised concerns about children playing next to it.“It is not unusual for park facilities to be located in proximity to burial grounds and memorials, but it is always necessary to be respectful in the design and construction,” he said.Mr. Abramson said that an archaeological study of the site was in the works to determine if it had historical significance before the location and design of the dog run would be finalized. In addition, he said, the department was planning a buffer of green plantings to visually separate the dog run from the memorial. There is currently more than 50 feet between the base of the monument and the fence of the temporary dog run, he said.The dog run, which does not yet have an opening date, is being paid for with money from the City Council. A parks department rendering showed a 5,333-square-foot enclosure that would include several benches and a separate area for small dogs.In the meantime, dog owners like Kathleen Corrigan are making do with the temporary dog run. Ms. Corrigan, 69, a retired ground hostess for Aer Lingus, and her neighbors have spent years tending the temporary dog run, glad to have any place at all to let their dogs off their leashes. They pick up broken glass and cigarette butts, rake the leaves and spend their own money to replace broken fencing.“It’s yucky,” said Ms. Corrigan, who comes every day with her two mutts, K. C. and Wylie. “If they roll over, they’re filthy. Look at all the holes and tree stumps.”But she added: “As bad as it is, we’re here all the time because the dogs love it.”