MUNICH —  German leaders are pushing a vigorous new case that it is time for their nation to find a more muscular voice in foreign affairs, even suggesting that Germany should no longer reflexively avoid some military deployments, as it did in Libya almost three years ago.Chancellor Angela Merkel has yet to weigh in on the use of the military, and it is not clear how willing the German public is to embrace a more assertive posture. But a variety of senior officials are urging a rethinking of the country’s assumptions about its diplomatic and military role. They are driven partly by alarm about crises from Ukraine to Africa, but also by unease about the strength of Germany’s partnership with the United States after revelations of American spying, and about American officials’ increasing reluctance to take the lead in interventions.President Joachim Gauck sent the strongest signal yet of a possible change in direction with a speech late Friday at the Munich Security Conference, an annual gathering that attracts an array of world leaders and defense experts and has historically been a forum for sharp policy debates.Germany’s Nazi and Communist pasts are no excuse for ducking international duties, Mr. Gauck said. He argued that the current Germany — “the best we have ever known,” he said — was well established as a democracy and as a reliable partner and ally, and that it should step out “earlier, more decisively and more substantially” on the world stage.The president has no power to make policy under Germany’s Constitution, but is expected to guide debate. Günther Nonnenmacher, co-publisher of Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, a center-right newspaper, wrote after the speech that Mr. Gauck “may well have spoken the authoritative word in the debate over German foreign and security policy.”Germany’s defense and foreign ministers have also suggested a willingness to pursue a more robust foreign policy, beyond the strong role the country has taken in setting economic policy in Europe. Although it is unlikely that the ministers would propose such a change in tone without Ms. Merkel’s concurrence, it is possible that the chancellor, known for her caution, is letting others make the case for Germany to leave the sidelines of international affairs, and waiting to see whether the discussion takes off.In his widely covered speech, Mr. Gauck, who was a Lutheran pastor in Communist East Germany before the Berlin Wall fell, told his 80 million compatriots that stepping up to the demands of a fast-changing world was “the greatest challenge of our time.”Without mentioning Libya — Germany abstained from a United Nations vote endorsing military intervention there in 2011 and refused to take any part — Mr. Gauck signaled that such behavior should not be repeated. International airstrikes against Libya helped lead to the ouster of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.German troops have been in Afghanistan since 2001 and in the Balkans since the 1990s. But, particularly during Ms. Merkel’s second term, the country has shied away from other military action, in part because the euro zone crisis has consumed its attention. France has taken a more active role in policing conflicts, including sending troops to Mali.In a carefully composed, half-hour speech that skirted direct admonition, Mr. Gauck said Germany could not grant itself some kind of privileged abstention, hiding behind history or simply being too cozy to act. He called for debate, saying, “When the ultimate case is discussed — deployment of the German military — it should be Germany can neither answer ‘no’ out of principle or give an automatic ‘yes.’ ”Germany’s new defense minister, Ursula von der Leyen, took the stage after Mr. Gauck and said, “Indifference is not an option for Germany.”Ms. von der Leyen, the first woman to hold the defense minister post, spoke days after telling the newsmagazine Der Spiegel that Germany might send more soldiers to bolster the French presence in Mali, meant to prevent the disintegration of a country that has been a growing base for Islamist militants.Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, who held the same job in Ms. Merkel’s first coalition, weighed in on another dispute on Saturday, reiterating a demand that President Viktor F. Yanukovych of Ukraine fulfill his promises to protesters seeking a closer bond with Europe.Mr. Steinmeier cast that call as part of a new German role in Europe. Echoing United States officials and other foreign policy makers who have encouraged Germany to act in accordance with its status as Europe’s largest and the world’s fourth largest economy, he added, “Germany is really too big to just comment from the sidelines.”Norbert Röttgen, a member of Ms. Merkel’s conservative party who heads the foreign affairs committee of the German Parliament, said in an interview that the new tone stemmed from “a coincidence of several events that shake you awake.”Mr. Röttgen listed several such events, like the war in Syria and the conflict in Ukraine, as well as what is known here as the N.S.A. affair: the vast intelligence gathering by the National Security Agency, including the tapping of Ms. Merkel’s cellphone.Disillusionment with the United States, which taught postwar Germany the value of individual freedom and privacy, has been acute across the spectrum of the German political elite.Particularly among Germans who have long embraced the United States, “the disappointment sits deep,” said Georg Mascolo, a prominent German journalist, voicing a view expressed in conversations with other experts and policy makers at the Munich conference. The idea that Germany’s greatest ally would spy on its most eager pupil has shaken the elite into action, several experts said, convincing Germany that it needs to set its own, more robust foreign policy.Mr. Röttgen said the new tone came “as the consciousness dawns that Europe is not in such good shape” and its strongest nation is looked on to do more.Longtime observers of German affairs said it was not clear that the new tone would result in major change. Josef Joffe, publisher and editor of the weekly newspaper Die Zeit and a visiting professor of political science at Stanford University, wrote in Die Zeit that even the government’s proposal for muscularity envisioned military engagement only in homeopathic doses.Washington, though, appears to have taken heart. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel welcomed Ms. von der Leyen’s pledge to take on a larger role in Africa, and the two agreed that she should visit the Pentagon soon.