WASHINGTON —  The online insurance marketplace in Oregon is such a technological mess that residents have been signing up for health coverage by hand. In Texas, political opposition to President Obama’s health law is so strong that some residents believe, erroneously, that the program is banned in their state.But in Connecticut, a smoothly functioning website, run by competent managers, has successfully enrolled so many patients that officials are offering to sell their expertise to states like Maryland, which is struggling to sign people up for coverage.The disparities reveal a stark truth about the Affordable Care Act: With the first open enrollment period set to end Monday, six months after its troubled online exchanges opened for business, the program widely known as Obamacare looks less like a sweeping federal overhaul than a collection of individual ventures playing out unevenly, state to state, in the laboratories of democracy.The White House said on Thursday that more than six million people have signed up for private plans, a significant political milestone for the Obama administration. Independent analysts estimate that an additional 3.5 million Americans are newly insured under Medicaid — figures the law’s backers hail as a success.But those numbers may not reveal much. Federal officials do not know how many of those who selected plans were previously uninsured, or how many actually paid their premiums. Independent experts warn that the intense focus on national numbers is misguided, and that it will take years to fully assess the law’s impact, much less deem it a success or a failure.“The whole narrative about Obamacare — ‘Will they get to six million? What is the percentage of young adults going to be?’ — has almost nothing to do with whether the law is working or not, whether the premiums are affordable or not, whether people think they are getting a good deal or not,” said Drew Altman, president of the Kaiser Family Foundation, whose analysts are closely tracking the measure.“It’s almost like trying to predict the local weather from national averages,” Mr. Altman said. “This is really now a state and local game, not a national one.”Indeed, a review of state-by-state enrollment data and other research, as well as interviews with patients, advocates, health policy analysts, elected officials, supporters and critics of the Affordable Care Act, suggest that, for consumers at least, the state of health care under the national law depends almost entirely on where a person lives.Some states have had a flowering of competition among insurers, including nonprofit co-ops — entirely new entities that are capturing the largest market share with low prices and remaking the coverage landscape in places like Maine. But in other places, including parts of states like New Hampshire and West Virginia, consumers have hardly any insurance choices at all.The deep political divisions the law has engendered — just 38 percent of Americans view it favorably, according to survey findings released this week by the Kaiser Family Foundation — make assessing it a complex task. The evidence remains largely anecdotal; for every satisfied supporter, it seems, there is a disgruntled opponent.Wayne Buchholz, a 47-year-old rancher in Rhame, N.D., saw his high-deductible insurance policy canceled; he bought a new policy for his family, he said, but the premium doubled, to $800 a month, and the $12,000 annual deductible is similar to what it was before.“Liberals in Washington think that we are not smart enough to make our own decisions, that I’m too stupid to decide what’s good for me,” Mr. Buchholz said. “In the past, I deliberately chose to have a higher deductible and a lower premium because I believe that insurance should be there for costs we cannot afford. Now I have a high premium and a high deductible, and virtually no choice.”But across the country in Baltimore, Theresa Thomas, 52, the director of a drug abuse treatment center, waited more than two hours at a recent health care enrollment fair to sign up for coverage for herself. She picked a plan that offered medical and dental coverage and was thrilled with her $179 a month premium, saying, “I’m walking out of here with a smile.”The Supreme Court’s 2012 decision to allow states to opt out of Medicaid expansion, and the decision by roughly three dozen states not to establish their own exchanges, have created cross-border disparities in coverage. Technical troubles with the federal HealthCare.gov website have depressed signups in many states that rely on it. The political climate in some states also has helped determine whether people enroll.Missouri and Texas, where opposition to the law is strong, are among states that have enacted tough restrictions on who can serve as “navigators,” or “certified assistance counselors” to guide consumers through the enrollment process. That has frustrated Mona Walls, who runs a small team of enrollment counselors in rural southeastern Missouri.Self-employed people in her area — truck drivers and cosmetologists, for instance — seem eager to sign up, Ms. Walls said, but “negative press” and problems with the federal website have discouraged many consumers. At the small town educational sessions she runs, she often encounters people whose conservative political philosophy makes them uncomfortable about accepting federal subsidies to buy private coverage.“When we speak about the law, we are very upfront that we are not there to engage in a political debate,” Ms. Walls said, though she added, “Once they see the prices and how much it does save them, it does a lot to change their attitude.”In addition, an estimated 4.8 million low-income Americans have little hope of gaining any coverage under the law because their states have decided not to expand Medicaid, the government-run insurance program for the poor. They fall into what experts call “the gap,” earning too much to qualify for traditional Medicaid, but too little to get tax credits that would make coverage affordable.“That’s been a huge challenge,” said Walter Moreau, executive director of Foundation Communities, a Texas nonprofit that offers tax preparation services and has trained employees to help enroll its clients in health plans. “Clients come to the tax center and they’re hopeful about finding insurance they can afford, but then they find out they fall into the gap. Sometimes people get angry; other times people cry. It’s kind of a devastating situation.”Two St. Louis women — Rene LaFerla, 58, and Andra Harkins, 61 — provide a case in point.Ms. LaFerla, a divorced full-time student in social work at Fontbonne University, receives $7,000 a year in rent payments from her housemates, she said. As a childless adult, she is not eligible for traditional Medicaid, and her income is too low for her to qualify for a subsidy. She shopped on HealthCare.gov and was quoted a $450-a-month premium with a $6,300 deductible.“It’s been a big disappointment,” she said. “A lot of us voted for President Obama because we thought this was going to be a good thing.”Mrs. Harkins, an actress, and her husband, a musician, earn about $35,000 a year, she said, and had been paying $1,000 a month for health insurance, with a $2,500 per-person deductible. But with tax subsidies offered under the law, their premiums are now $149; their deductible, $1,100 per person.“It’s crazy,” she said. “We were completely blown away.”In some states that have expanded Medicaid, like Kentucky — which has drawn national praise as a model for other states to follow — the biggest chunk of the newly insured are Medicaid patients. More than 300,000 Kentuckians are enrolled in new health coverage, the state says, 80 percent of them through Medicaid.Enrollment in private plans, as opposed to Medicaid, varies drastically across state lines. An analysis published this week by health economists at the University of Pennsylvania found that Vermont — a state that has long been hospitable to universal health care — is far and away the leader; 54 percent of Vermonters eligible to sign up for private insurance (a figure that includes those already covered by non-employer plans) have done so. But in South Dakota, the study found, just 6 percent of those eligible have enrolled.The reasons for such disparities are complex, having to do with a state’s political climate, whether it administers its own website, how well that website is working, and how aggressive its nonprofit networks have been in reaching out to prospective enrollees. States with their own exchanges, set up within existing state agencies, tend to fare best.“The outreach varies by state, and it’s sort of organic and homegrown, but it’s fair to say that it is more robust in the state marketplace states,” said Heather Howard, who directs the State Health Reform Assistance Network, a project of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.In Rhode Island and Colorado, for instance, officials have created so-called pop-up stores in recent weeks to increase signups in regions where enrollment was flagging. “They can move on a dime and say, ‘Boy, we’ve got a problem in this part of the state, or with this population,’ in a way that HealthCare.gov can’t do,” Ms. Howard said.In the future, one big test of how well the law is working will be the actions of insurance companies, which must now sift through their records, analyze their risk pools and determine what products they will sell, and at what prices, during the next open enrollment period, beginning in November. One of the biggest insurers, WellPoint, recently raised its earnings forecast — a sign that the company is bullish on the exchanges, which are “tracking our general expectations,” its chief executive, Joseph R. Swedish, said in an interview.Insurers say they are just beginning to get a handle on the health of people enrolling in the exchanges, in part by starting to analyze early prescription data and to see if any of the people signing up had been previous customers. Some insurers, like Florida Blue, report seeing a flurry of signups as the March deadline looms. In Philadelphia, the chief executive of Independence Blue Cross said the mix of people under 35 seems to be increasing.But companies say it is too early to tell whether the marketplaces will be successful. As Andy Williams, director of consumer marketing at Blue Cross of Nebraska, said, “This is really a two- to three-year process for the dust to settle.”