CHICAGO —  During two years as ambassador to Russia, Michael McFaul was constantly followed, harassed and demonized on state television. But though Mr. McFaul has left government service and returned home, the spying on him doesn’t seem to have stopped.Mr. McFaul, who finished his tour as President Obama’s envoy in Moscow in February just as the clash over Ukraine was escalating, told an audience here on Friday that he believed that Russian agents were tapping his telephone as well as that of his wife, Donna Norton. He said his suspicions were confirmed recently when Ms. Norton’s boss at her nonprofit advocacy group, MomsRising, tried to reach her. “She called my wife’s cellphone and a Russian answered it,” said Mr. McFaul, who has returned to Stanford University in Palo Alto, Calif., where he is a professor.What remained unclear, he added, was whether that was a glitch that accidentally exposed the spying or an intentional act to send him a warning. “Were they sloppy?” he asked during a talk at the University of Chicago’s Institute of Politics. “Or was that a shot across the bow to say, ‘We know you’re in Palo Alto and we’re still around’?”Mr. McFaul was a high-profile figure during his time in Moscow. As a White House aide, he had helped formulate Mr. Obama’s “reset” policy of improving relations with Russia. But when he was sent to Moscow as ambassador in early 2012, it coincided with Vladimir V. Putin’s return to the presidency and a growing anti-American policy.He was shadowed wherever he went by Russian agents. He was once stranded when the police stopped his driver and took his license away on the spot. Russian television doctored images to paint him as a sinister figure attempting to orchestrate a coup.Mr. McFaul, a longtime democracy advocate, said he was a convenient scapegoat for Mr. Putin. When he first arrived in Moscow, a top lieutenant to Mr. Putin, Vladislav Surkov, told him as much.“Mike, I’m glad you’re here,” Mr. McFaul recalled him saying. “You are the poster child of our anti-American theme.”