ROME —  Mar’yana Tril, one of the more than 192,000 Ukrainians who live and work in Italy, took an unscheduled holiday from her job as a babysitter in February. As the rebellion against the government mounted back home, so did the anguish of being away.“You’re watching the news, and things are getting worse, so you can’t resist,” she said. “I was up all night monitoring the situation on my computer, so I decided that I might as well go.” Once she got there, she ended up driving some of the wounded to hospitals during the revolt that toppled Ukraine’s former pro-Russian president, Viktor F. Yanukovych.There are more Ukrainians living in Italy than in any other European Union country, according to Eurostat data. Nearly 80 percent of them are women who have easily found work here over the last two decades, often caring for Italy’s aging population. In many cases, they enter on a tourist visa, and then overstay, finding live-in jobs through word-of-mouth contacts.“The need for caregivers is great, so they’re able to find work with all possible means,” said Antonio Ricci, a senior researcher for IDOS, a Rome-based research center on migration. “The Ukraine has been a resource” in filling gaps in the Italian welfare system, he said.Being so far from their own families at a time of deep uncertainty has intensified feelings of helplessness and anxiety, Ukrainians said in interviews. So they are doing what they can from a distance. Many protest weekly in front of the Russian Embassy in Rome. They have raised money and sent it home. Some are even training and organizing to help in the event of war with Russia.After returning to Rome, Ms. Tril, 29, said she enrolled in a first-aid course that was taught by two Ukrainian nurses. She was among about 100 Ukrainians who joined the “Rome Sotnia,” she said, using the military term for company. “We’re getting organized in case we have to leave.”Svitlana Kovalska, president of the Association of Ukrainian Women Workers in Italy and a cultural mediator, spoke of “the Italian syndrome,” a form of depression that has long affected Ukrainian immigrants here. Based on her experience helping Ukrainian émigrés, she said that the women who work as caregivers were acutely affected.“They live far from their families, feel enormous nostalgia and suffer a huge sense of guilt for not being with their families,” Ms. Kovalska said. “When I speak to women, they want to return. They’re separated from their families, their kids, in a dangerous situation. It’s natural that they’re afraid of losing their kids, and the crisis has added new fears, new anxieties.”The widening conflict in Ukraine has produced a constant state of apprehension that “influences us psychologically, making it difficult for many people to work,” she said. “This grief is ruining our souls.”For some, going back to Ukraine, even if only briefly, temporarily assuages the anxiety. But many cannot go, and are coping through activism, protests and social networks.Lyudmyla D’Ayala, one of the nurses who taught the training course that Ms. Tril attended, said the situation at home was such that knowledge of first-aid was essential for people who felt compelled to go home. “Because it’s clear that this is a small war, drama can happen at any moment, so it’s better to have people on the ground trained to deal with the casualties,” she said.Ms. D’Ayala spoke on the margins of a demonstration one recent Sunday afternoon that brought about 300 people to a square in front of a Roman train station where buses depart for Ukraine.Some women wore bright headbands of flowers, other protesters staged a performance piece recalling the Russian aggression of other Eastern bloc countries, still others used a microphone to declaim poetry amid diatribes against Russian aggression. People wept when a song about the people who died in the Maidan, the square in Kiev at the center of the protests, was broadcast. “It’s never been about joining the European Union or the euro,” Ms. D’Ayala said, “it’s about fighting for democracy.”But even in their shared opposition to Russia, there were catcalls and whistles when some of the participants in the rally took the microphone to campaign for diverse candidates in Ukraine’s presidential election, scheduled for May 25.The protests should not become sounding boards for political speeches, said Anna, one Ukrainian woman who declined to give her surname for fear of creating problems with her employer. “Our people are dying and we’re squabbling over candidates,” she said. “It’s crazy.”“If we’re here we can have different opinions,” she said. “but we have to be together.”During the early days of the protests in Kiev, the Ukrainian capital, Ukrainians in Rome and other Italian cities used such rallies to raise about 20,000 euros, or $27,000, organizers said. Volunteers continue to collect primary goods, pharmaceuticals and clothing.“People gave one or two euros to support the cause,” said Oles Horodetskyi, the head of the Christian Association of Ukrainians in Italy, and one of the organizers of the Rome protests. “There was a solidarity among people I hadn’t seen for some time,” he said last month during a Thursday afternoon rally. He has since gone to Ukraine to help coordinate the support of his compatriots in Italy.Often the women who work here as caregivers are already the principal providers for their families back in Ukraine. “Lots of women become A.T.M. machines for their families, which is a tragedy,” Ms. Kovalska said.According to one 2011 study by the International Organization for Migration, remittances, or monetary transfers, to Ukraine “are nearly equivalent to Foreign Direct Investment,” and “hypothetical models estimate that the Ukrainian economy would have lost about 7 percent of its potential without the stimulating effects of migrant transfers.”Maria Hladets was looking for some economic relief when she decided to emigrate from Ukraine eight years ago. “Life was unlivable, we had Italian prices, but I was earning 150 euro a month,” said Ms. Hladets, who is a full-time caregiver.She has been sending money home, and joining in the protests, too. “I have been coming every week,” she said, “because I didn’t want to sit at home and cry in front of the television.”