BERLIN — BARELY five feet tall, Claudia Dantschke was dwarfed by the lectern when she spoke at a recent gathering of German experts on Islam, its challenges to democracy and especially the luring of teenagers from Europe to join the war in Syria.But that certainly did not stop Ms. Dantschke from being heard. Stocky, plainly dressed, she is a breathless fountain of words, one of Germany’s most prominent experts on its roughly four million Muslims, yet one who keeps her activities and research so firmly anchored in the community that she says she is rarely viewed as a threat.Ms. Dantschke, 51, has counseled scores of families trying to prevent their sons and even some of their daughters from embarking on the path to jihad with extremist Muslim groups in Syria. The war is no abstraction in Germany, just a drive of a day or two away. That is particularly true for Turks born and raised here, who need no passport and no interpreter to enter Turkey and then hop over the border.Officially, at least 320 young men from Germany have made their way to the war, though Ms. Dantschke thinks the number is closer to 500. About 20 to 25 of them, including one just 16 years old, have been killed, and around 100 have returned, officials say. Although Ms. Dantschke believes that only about 15 of those have real battlefield experience, the authorities fear what they might do with any skills they picked up.Ms. Dantschke has gained a growing role in Germany’s response because she was one of the first to raise alarms about the threat of radical Islam — in the 1990s, when few here even acknowledged Turkish “guest workers” as permanent residents. “We experienced hate propaganda against other groups in the population, intimidation of advertisers and violence and lack of transparency about organizational ties and positions of some Turkish Islamic groups,” she said.Her life is woven from random threads of recent history: an upbringing in Communist East Germany that fostered a thirst for things foreign; a rigorous education as an Arabist; a jolt, with Germany’s reunification, from secure state employment to joblessness; a rare entree into Berlin’s Turkish community; two decades of fighting first right-wing and then Islamic extremism.“I got to know West Germany through the Turks,” Ms. Dantschke said in a recent interview, noting that neither Turks nor East Germans knew West German ways.The outcome is someone who knows the often insular Turkish and Muslim communities here from the inside, but also sets great store by family, perhaps from an early life of inward resistance in her family to Communism.Puffing on one of her frequent cigarettes, she smiled at the recollection. “I know what it is like to live in a dictatorship,” she said.ONCE, her father talked of seeing beggars on a business trip to the Soviet Union. The teenage Ms. Dantschke refused to believe it. Later, she herself saw food ration cards in the Russian city of Novosibirsk. “He was trying to teach me reality,” she said. “And I believed the school and state indoctrination more than my parents.”Using methods originally devised to wean young East Germans off far-right ideologies, Ms. Dantschke tries to combat Islamists’ appeal to German youths, an attraction that has intensified over the past year. Recruiters give away Qurans or proselytize as fundamentalist Salafi preachers. Jihadis post German-language videos extolling their new life. Ms. Dantschke monitors it all.“The family is really the only window out of this circle,” said Ms. Dantschke, who has written several handbooks and essays on Salafi beliefs, the radicalization of youths and extreme Islamic groups. “If you leave the family alone, then radicalizations have free space.”Families must be prepared to stick with her program for years, she said, citing the experience of reclaiming young people from the far right. Of the more than 500 youths who have gone through the program, she said, only four have regressed.One tough message to deliver, she said, is telling a mother or father that the serene behavior that sets in when a drifting teenager first finds radical Islam is no cause for joy.Next, Ms. Dantschke warned, the child often insists on regular prayer, or conventional dress and diet for the family. If less religious parents object, they only confirm the predictions of the teenager’s new Islamic mentors, reinforcing their credibility.From the 1990s until just recently, Ms. Dantschke lived, by her own description and that of friends, hand-to-mouth, working as a journalist and translator, or on social projects that teetered from one government or foundation handout to the next.That made her — well before the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, a plot hatched in part in Germany — a “deep connoisseur” of Muslim groups, said Bernd Wagner, a criminologist who is also from East Germany. By 2001, he had engaged Ms. Dantschke to combat right-wing extremism at his Center for Democratic Culture in Berlin, where she now runs her program, Hayat.THE greater recognition of the need to integrate Muslims into German society means that Ms. Dantschke’s voice now carries to the state and federal governments, and to the national news media.She was born in 1963 in Leipzig, two years after the raising of the Berlin Wall. Her mother, a nurse, had been abandoned by her husband, a cartographer who fled to the West. Ms. Dantschke’s father, an engineer, fell for the deserted woman. Claudia arrived, but her parents never formally married.Like many in the East, including Chancellor Angela Merkel, nine years her senior, the young Claudia plotted from age 12 a path that might yield a job with the coveted perk of foreign travel. Her 13th birthday present, a photo book of New York City, expensive at 27 East German marks, fired her ambitions even more. She devoured it thousands of times.Original plans to study French or Spanish led eventually to Arabic, and after graduation from college in 1985, she took a job with the state news agency ADN on its Arabic desk. That came with another perk, a Berlin apartment, which she finally landed months before the Wall fell in November 1989, and still retains.Reunification in October 1990 found her jobless. She stumbled into travel journalism for a Turkish travel agency in West Berlin. The owners had a slot on local cable television, and asked Ms. Dantschke to fill it. “I had no idea about TV,” she said. “Next day, I was on camera.”In the summer of 1992, that job led her to Ali Yildirim, then the Berlin bureau chief for the Turkish newspaper Milliyet, who noticed that she was covering the Turkish community with a fresh eye. “I asked how much she got,” he said. “She said, ‘Nothing.’ I said, ‘I’ll double that.’ ”She and Mr. Yildirim remain friends, but after years of toil for little or no pay, she gave priority to her social work.“I am content,” she said. In stark contrast to the way she mapped out life in East Germany, “I never think about tomorrow,” she added. “Something has always turned up.”Including, finally, that foreign travel.Last year, she made it to New York. “I kept saying: ‘I was never here. Why does it feel so familiar?’ Then I realized, through that book, I was always here.” The next goal is to return, by sea.“But only on a cargo boat,” she said. “Not one of those luxury liners.”