Carnegie Hall’s imminent festival, Vienna, City of Dreams, promises to be one of the most lavish in its rich history: a three-week citywide celebration with more than 50 events, anchored by five programs from the Vienna Philharmonic and two concert operas from that orchestra’s parent company, the Vienna State Opera, at Carnegie. A broad representation of Viennese music from the 18th to the 21st centuries will range from Strauss family waltzes and other froth to those cathartically harrowing operas Richard Strauss’s “Salome” and Alban Berg’s “Wozzeck.”The festival officially begins on Friday with the 59th Viennese Opera Ball in New York, at the Waldorf-Astoria. But not everything will be festive and celebratory. Vienna has, after all, also been a city of nightmares at times, and the bleaker aspects of its history will be examined in some detail during the festival.On Feb. 24 — even before the first concert, with Franz Welser-Möst conducting the Vienna Philharmonic in an edifying program of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony and Schoenberg’s “Friede auf Erden” (“Peace on Earth”) on Feb. 25 — the Chumir Foundation for Ethics in Leadership will begin a symposium on Vienna’s history and legacy of the last 150 years at the Paley Center for Media. In the first panel, “Vienna, 1860 to 1914: Creativity, Culture, Science and Politics,” speakers including Mr. Welser-Möst will discuss topics including “the roots of societal breakdown.”If that doesn’t start the fur flying, the second panel, on Feb. 27, should: “How Did the Cultured, Creative Society of Vienna Lose Its Moral Compass?” Presenting the Vienna Philharmonic as the prime specimen, and with Clemens Hellsberg, a violinist and president of the self-governing orchestra, as one of the speakers, the panel will inevitably reach to a deeper, more universal issue: the moral responsibility of artists and artistic institutions both to their time and to history.The Philharmonic’s behavior and that of individual members during the Nazi era was, by any accounting, execrable. But the orchestra has taken significant steps in the last quarter-century, and especially since Mr. Hellsberg took over in 1997, to own up to that past and acknowledge its complicity with the Nazis, to honor those hurt or killed through the actions or inactions of an earlier generation of players and to devote itself to social good and the cause of international peace.Has it done enough?No, not even close, say some, led by the Greens, the left-liberal political party in Austria, which keeps close and skeptical watch on the Philharmonic’s occasionally faltering steps to escape the shadow of its past. And for some — those whose families were involved in the purging of Jews from the orchestra in 1938, perhaps — it never could do enough.Others, like Daniel Barenboim, who conducted the orchestra’s New Year’s concerts in December and January, assert that the orchestra is on the right track.“Admitting responsibility is always a good thing,” Mr. Barenboim said in an interview, “and the Philharmonic has done that. It’s not just the Vienna Philharmonic and Austria that have horrors in their past. One has to decide how responsible one holds people whose ancestors did this, that or the other.”Joel Bell, the founding chairman of the Chumir Foundation and the organizer of the Carnegie symposium, agrees and supports Mr. Hellsberg’s initiatives.“Led by Clemens, the Philharmonic has taken all the very good steps,” Mr. Bell said. He enumerated three: The orchestra has laid out the facts, “a necessary first step,” on its website; it has mounted commemorations, “tugging at the heartstrings to help people remember and to teach,” as with a 2000 performance of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony at a former concentration camp in Mauthausen, Austria; and it has shown a willingness to participate in dialogue, as in the symposium.But it is also true that the Philharmonic’s hand has been forced somewhat in the laying out of facts.Early last year, word of an incident involving Baldur von Schirach made the rounds in the news media and on the Internet, with considerable help from the Greens. Schirach — among other things, the governor of Vienna from 1940 to 1945, and partly responsible for the deportation of tens of thousands of Jews to Nazi extermination camps in German-occupied Poland — was one of many (possibly including Hitler, or such at least was the intent) presented with rings or medals of honor by the orchestra in 1942, to commemorate its centenary.Schirach lost his ring during his 20-year imprisonment in Spandau for war crimes, seemingly to a souvenir-hunting American soldier. Schirach’s son Richard revealed in a book published in 2004 that an emissary of the orchestra had presented his father with a copy of the ring after his release from prison, a fact that gained wide circulation only a year or so ago.In response to the public outcry, the orchestra commissioned three historians familiar with the terrain to undertake a quick but thorough study of the orchestra’s activities during the Nazi era. They published their findings on the ensemble’s website on March 10, just before the 75th anniversary of the Austrian Anschluss.The ring, it was determined, had been delivered to Schirach in 1966 or 1967 by Helmut Wobisch, a trumpeter in the orchestra with a deep Nazi past. As a member of the SS, Wobisch spied on and denounced colleagues; he was ousted from the Philharmonic after the war but returned in 1947, became its manager in 1953 and played in it until 1968.Mr. Hellsberg, who became the orchestra’s first archivist in 1979 and published a lavishly produced history of the ensemble, “Demokratie der Könige” (“Democracy of Kings”), in 1992, argues that Wobisch was acting entirely on his own initiative, not on behalf of the orchestra, though his reinstatement and promotion within the ranks suggest that he cannot have been too far out of step with communal sentiment. In any case, last October, the Philharmonic members, at their annual meeting, voted to revoke the awards to Schirach and five other officials, a symbolic gesture obviously, but a meaningful one.The historians also pulled together a lot of other information, much of which had appeared in Mr. Hellsberg’s book and elsewhere, if never in so comprehensive and exhaustive a fashion.The assertion of the lead historian, Oliver Rathkolb, for example, that “in 1942 about 49 percent of active Vienna Philharmonic musicians were members” of the Nazi Party came as no surprise. Mr. Hellsberg had the number at 42 percent by the end of the war, 47 percent if affiliated organizations were included.Mr. Rathkolb also took up other topics, like the festive concerts of Strauss waltzes and the like — begun on Dec. 31, 1939, and Jan. 1, 1941, though not called New Year’s concerts until 1946 — and how they played into “the Nazi regime’s propaganda-by-education strategy.”The bulk of the historians’ report consists of Bernadette Mayrhofer’s sobering accounts of the fates of 16 Jewish musicians: 13 who were expelled from the orchestra soon after the Anschluss and three who had already retired. Nine, including the venerable concertmaster Arnold Rosé, fled into exile; five were deported and murdered in concentration camps; and two died in deprivation in Vienna, one awaiting deportation, the other having been evicted from his apartment and otherwise traumatized.The third historian, Fritz Trümpi, reported on historical and structural matters, including a kind of “indirect politicization” that took place in the climate of Austrofascism and a gradual “integration into Nazi cultural policy.” Musically, this integration brought an increased presence of works by Bruckner, Wagner and the Strauss family.“The repeatedly increased enrollment of the Philharmonic in the topos of the ‘Music City Vienna’ since 1938,” Mr. Trümpi concludes, “served to establish the consolidation of Nazi rule in Vienna.”So why is all of this still dragging on as a lively issue?“For us and for Germany and Europe,” Mr. Rathkolb said in an interview, “National Socialism is still hot history. It will take another generation or two to become cold history. World War I for us is cold history.”Yet as he made clear in his book “The Paradoxical Republic: Austria, 1945-2005,” one outcome of World War I remained problematic for Austrian identity: the shrinking of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, 50 million inhabitants strong, to a ministate of seven million, yearning for Anschluss with a democratically organized German Reich and later the Weimar Republic. An enfeebled Austria entered World War II looking for salvation in all the wrong places, now in union with Nazi Germany, and emerged from it in denial, seeing itself as “Hitler’s first victim.”Mr. Rathkolb quotes an unidentified German politician on the Austrians in 1952, “Instead of acknowledging their share of responsibility, they want to be coddled like a bullied child.”In contrast to the growing awareness and acknowledgment of heinous crimes that eventually took hold in Germany, the climate of denial remained pervasive in Austria until the late 1980s, when, in Mr. Rathkolb’s words, “this repression of memory collapsed under the impetus of reassessment of the Holocaust in the U.S. and thereafter in Europe, too.”The final blow to the victim doctrine may have been the election of Kurt Waldheim as president of Austria in 1986, after it had become widely known that he had lied about his complicity in Nazi war crimes. Suddenly, there was an appetite to know more about “perpetrators and bystanders,” Mr. Rathkolb said.“It took the younger generation to make the first step,” he added. “Now we’re on second and third steps. Each year another chapter opened.”Mr. Hellsberg suggested an additional reason for the continuing trickle of revelations specific to the Vienna Philharmonic and its parent, the Vienna State Opera: “At the end of the ’80s, archives had not yet opened up, archives of the state. That was prehistoric time, before the Internet. Now they have opened, step by step.”The Greens are having none of that. The recent revelations, they say, have been too little, too late.“Now they have done more or less what everyone knew,” said Hannes Metzler, a historian and a spokesman for the party. There is little new research, he added, or provenance research on the orchestra’s extensive holdings of instruments and artifacts, some of them undoubtedly of suspicious heritage.Mr. Hellsberg remains steadfast on his course. “In some ways, we represent Austria,” he said. “We have more obligations than just to do the job. We also have moral obligations. We are aware that it is important that our complete history be displayed, ups and downs, not just the Nazi period.”If you wish to join the argument, you can look for Mr. Hellsberg at the Paley Center on Feb. 27. He will be the one with an arm in a sling, supporting an elbow broken in a fall on ice late last year, which kept him out of the New Year’s concerts and will keep him out of the Carnegie concerts.He may welcome the diversion.