INTERNATIONALBecause of an editing error, a picture caption on Monday with an article about the hopes and fears among Tibetans and Uighurs, ethnic minorities in China’s far west, over Beijing’s response to pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong described incorrectly Xinjiang, the traditional Uighur homeland. It is a region, not a province.BUSINESS DAYThe Economic Scene column on Wednesday, about college aid for lower-income students, misspelled the middle name of a researcher who looked into for-profit colleges. She is Stephanie Riegg Cellini (not Rieg).•An article on Tuesday about Emmanuel Macron, the new economy minister of France, referred incorrectly to the period during which his wife had been his teacher. It was in high school, not first grade. (In French, “Premiere,” or first grade, refers to high school.)SPORTSAn article in some editions on Wednesday about a free viewing area at the San Francisco Giants’ AT&T Park misstated one of the years the Giants won the World Series. Besides 2012, they also won in 2010 — but not in 2014 (not yet anyway).•Because of an editing error, a Sports of The Times column in some editions on Tuesday about the Washington Nationals’ victory over the San Francisco Giants in Game 3 of their National League division series misidentified the team for which catcher Wilson Ramos plays. It is the Nationals, not the Giants. And also because of an editing error, a picture caption misidentified, in some copies, the Giants player shown. The photograph was of third baseman Pablo Sandoval trying to catch pitcher Madison Bumgarner’s errant throw — not of Bumgarner making the throw.•Because of an editing error, an article in some editions on Wednesday about the San Francisco Giants’ 3-2 victory over the Washington Nationals in Game 4 of their National League division series misidentified the Washington pitcher whose wild pitch in the seventh inning led to the Giants’ 3-2 lead. As the article initially noted, he is Aaron Barrett — not Matt Thornton, who was replaced by Barrett.•A headline for a report in the Sports Briefing column in some editions on Saturday about a preseason game between the Rangers and the Chicago Blackhawks misidentified the winner. As The Associated Press report correctly noted, the Rangers won — not the Blackhawks.•Because of an editing error, an Associated Press report in the Sports Briefing column on Friday about soccer matches in the Europa League tournament misspelled the name of the team that held Tottenham to a 1-1 draw. It is Besiktas, not Beisktas. The error was repeated in the headline.THE ARTSBecause of an editing error, a dance review on Wednesday about Pacific Northwest Ballet, at the Marion Oliver McCaw Hall in Seattle, misstated the timing of the company’s farewell performances of Kent Stowell’s “Nutcracker.” They will be this season; they were not last season. The review also misstated the year the company will start performing George Balanchine’s “Nutcracker.” It is next year, not this Christmas.WEEKENDA film review on Friday about the Bollywood action romance “Bang Bang!” misidentified the movie in which Pierce Brosnan has an “over the top” surfing scene in citing examples of the kind of “cartoonish excesses” found in “Bang Bang!” It is “Die Another Day,” not “Tomorrow Never Dies.”The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.