Wall Street financiers, real estate developers and schoolteachers are picking sides in the battle for control of the New York State Senate, spending millions of dollars through independent political groups in a bid to influence the elections on Tuesday.Mirroring their rise in federal elections, the “super PACs” are playing a larger role than ever in state races in New York. Outside groups have spent about $13 million this year in key Senate contests, records show, making them major players in races from Long Island to Buffalo that could determine the balance of power in the capital.Democrats, aided by Mayor Bill de Blasio, are hoping to take back the Senate, currently controlled by Republicans and a group of breakaway Democrats. With all statewide offices expected to remain in Democratic hands, the Senate has become the primary battleground.So far, roughly $3 has been spent supporting Republicans for every $2 that has been spent supporting Democrats, according to an analysis by The New York Times of State Board of Elections filings.The aggressive spending by outside groups follows a ruling by a federal judge in April that struck down a $150,000 limit on what a person could give to an independent group that spends money to support political candidates. Such groups can now receive unlimited donations. In recent weeks, wealthy people have made individual donations as large as $1 million.Most spending is still coming from Senate candidates and their parties, which have reported about $48 million in contributions during this election cycle, according to Bill Mahoney, a researcher at the New York Public Interest Research Group.Yet the infusion of outside money has the potential to tilt the playing field in local races. Republicans are benefiting from several groups, including Jobs for New York, run by the Real Estate Board of New York. It spent millions of dollars last year to help its favored candidates for the New York City Council.Jobs for New York has already spent about $1.9 million to help Republicans, including candidates on Long Island, in the Hudson Valley and in the Albany area. Nearly all of its contributions have come from donors with addresses in New York City.The real estate board has close ties to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat who in the past has declined to help his own party win control of the Senate. This year, Mr. Cuomo has stated his support for Democratic control, but neither loudly nor with much frequency.The largest spender on behalf of Republicans has been New Yorkers for a Balanced Albany, run by StudentsFirstNY, an advocacy organization that supports more rigorous teacher evaluations and the expansion of charter schools.The group has spent about $3.6 million. Its donors include the hedge fund managers Julian H. Robertson Jr. and Daniel S. Loeb, who gave $1 million each, and Paul E. Singer, who gave $500,000.“We’re just trying to elect good people to office who will stand up for students against special interests,” said Jenny Sedlis, the executive director of StudentsFirstNY.The group has produced several commercials that try to associate Democratic candidates outside of New York City with Mr. de Blasio, who is cast as a left-wing villain who is out of touch with the rest of the state.“Democrats led by Bill de Blasio could control every branch of state government,” one of the commercials says, warning of possible tax increases and urging the election of a Republican, Tom Croci, over the Democrat, Adrienne Esposito, in a Senate district on Long Island. (The ad says nothing about education.)Another group, Balance New York, has spent about $1.2 million to help Republicans. It is largely funded by a Washington group, the Republican State Leadership Committee, as well as Mr. Singer, who contributed another $500,000. Mr. de Blasio also surfaces in this group’s ads, including some going after upstate Democratic senators that warn about the senators’ “New York City buddies.”One group giving Democrats help, Friends of Democracy, advocates public financing for state political campaigns. It has spent about $670,000, most of which was donated by Jonathan Soros, a son of the financier George Soros.The political branch of the state teachers’ union, New York State United Teachers, has already spent about $3.6 million to support Democratic candidates in races that could determine which party will claim a majority of seats. It waged an effective attack on Mark J. Grisanti, a Republican incumbent from Buffalo, when he faced a primary challenge from his right. The union supports the Democratic candidate, Marc C. Panepinto. Mr. Grisanti lost the primary, but remains in the race as the candidate of the Independence Party.Karen E. Magee, the president of state teachers’ union, said New Yorkers should not want a Senate “managed by billionaire hedge fund managers who are coming in saying, ‘Hey, we know what’s best for education.’ ”“They’re trying to buy what they want,” she said.