MEXICO CITY — With only 6,634 votes separating them, both candidates in El Salvador’s presidential race proclaimed victory on Monday, revealing a country equally divided between the political heirs of forces that fought a bloody civil war a quarter of a century ago.Although Salvador Sánchez Cerén, a former rebel commander who is the governing party’s candidate, held a narrow lead, the electoral tribunal said that the close vote made it impossible to name a winner and told the candidates not to declare victory.It would take a more definitive count, which began Monday, to determine the eventual outcome, said Walter Araujo, a magistrate who explained that the tribunal would need to review blank and contested ballots and complete counting the 10,500 absentee ballots cast by Salvadorans living abroad.But neither Mr. Sánchez Cerén nor his opponent, Norman Quijano, a two-term mayor of San Salvador, heeded the tribunal’s warning.Mr. Sánchez Cerén, the vice president and former education minister, told his opponents to “respect the will of the Salvadoran people.” Mr. Quijano, the candidate of the right-wing Nationalist Republican Alliance, or Arena, laced his victory speech with menace, telling his supporters that the party was on “a war footing” and that “the armed forces are watching the fraud that is being concocted.”The mention of the armed forces rang alarm bells for many Salvadorans, who have succeeded in establishing a working democracy since the 1992 peace accords ended a 12-year civil war. Arena’s origins lie in the far-right death squads linked to the military that were formed during the civil war to eliminate political opponents. As a political party that later spent two decades in power, it then distanced itself from those roots.Mr. Sánchez Cerén’s party, the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front, or F.M.L.N., arose out of the left-wing guerrilla movement that fought the American-backed government during the war. But the party has governed from the center-left since it first won the presidency in 2009 under President Mauricio Funes. Mr. Funes, a former television journalist who was not a member of the rebel movement, is barred from running again.An editorial in the online newspaper El Faro called on both candidates to acknowledge the country’s division and to find common ground. “This is the biggest test facing the national political system since the peace accords were signed,” the newspaper wrote.Although El Salvador is troubled by gang violence and anemic economic growth, Mr. Sánchez Cerén had been expected to win convincingly on the strength of the government’s popular social programs. The last opinion polls gave him a lead of double digits over Mr. Quijano.A number of factors may have hurt Mr. Sánchez Cerén’s support in the final days, including vivid coverage of street protests in Venezuela that Mr. Quijano’s campaign used to scare voters away from the left, said Héctor Silva Ávalos, a Salvadoran journalist and research fellow at American University.Mr. Funes may have also hurt support for the vice president by using his weekly radio address as a vehicle for the campaign against Arena, Mr. Silva said.On the stump, Mr. Sánchez Cerén, 69, staked out moderate positions, running on the accomplishments of the existing government.The party “is more pragmatic in that they have had five years in power,” said Michael Allison, an expert on Central America at the University of Scranton.On security, Mr. Sánchez Cerén sidestepped the most contentious issue, a truce between street gangs that has reduced El Salvador’s murder rate.Under the 2012 truce, which the government does not openly support, gang leaders have won better prison conditions and ordered gang members to stop killing one another. But El Salvador’s murder rate is still one of the highest in the world, and extortion continues unabated.Mr. Quijano, 67, condemned the truce, arguing that the government had negotiated away the legitimacy of the state, Mr. Allison said.Under Mr. Funes, El Salvador has had generally good relations with Washington, although both Congress and the Obama administration have pushed the government to crack down more effectively on organized crime, drug trafficking and corruption.As many as two million Salvadorans live outside the country, most of them in the United States. They sent an estimated $4.2 billion back to relatives last year.