After the warm-up speeches, a hush of expectation fell. The Forum in Bath is an Art Deco movie theater now used mostly for concerts and evangelical services, and on the last Tuesday of April, it had the air of a revivalist meeting. In the foyer, they were selling books, button badges and even tea towels, while inside a lively, if middle-aged, audience nearly filled the former cinema.They had come to hear Nigel Farage, the loquacious, dynamic, bumptious, bibulous, irrepressible leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party, who was touring the country ahead of the elections to the European Parliament later this month. He has himself been a member of that body for 15 years and will doubtless be re-elected, although he belongs to it only to attack it, and his party exists to destroy it, or at least British participation in it and in the European Union.That still seems quite a remote prospect, but these elections, separate from national elections, could have a drastic impact on British politics. As yet, UKIP doesn’t have a single member of Parliament, or M.P., in the House of Commons at Westminster. But if the polls are right, UKIP will come out on top in the European elections, ahead of the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats, who at present govern the country in uneasy coalition, as well as the opposition Labour Party. Even if UKIP doesn’t believe in the E.U., winning in the European elections will greatly enhance their position back home.Maybe because he thought he was about to upset the political apple cart, Farage had a swagger in his step as he took the stage at the Forum to thunderous applause. He spoke easily, at some length, with no notes or prompter, relentlessly hammering away at his theme: The country threw away its independence and is now governed by the Eurocrats of Brussels, who have let in a flood of immigrants from Bulgaria and Romania. All will be well if the United Kingdom leaves the European Union.Outside, there was a knot of demonstrators as well as a BBC television truck: Farage is news. Two protesters held a banner that said (incorrectly as it happens) “Nigel Farage is a banker,” and one woman had a small handwritten placard reading, “They called Hitler charismatic too.” If the comparison is hyperbolic, she’s hardly alone. For all his apparent geniality, Farage is seen by plenty of people as a pernicious figure and his party as a danger to the political health of the nation.In addition to an egg thrown at him as he was walking through Nottingham three days later, a deluge of criticism and scandal has recently washed over him and his party — from allegations of financial impropriety to a concerted campaign to brand UKIP as racist, an accusation that some of its own activists have done nothing to discourage. And all of it is laughed off by Farage with cheeky bravado. At his peroration in Bath, he said that he had received a letter from a 92-year-old former bomber pilot: “Nigel, you only start getting flak when you’re near the target!”He likes to dish out flak as well as take it. In February 2010, Farage gained a measure of international fame, or notoriety, when Herman Van Rompuy, a Belgian politician who was the newly appointed president of the European Union, was in Strasbourg, France, to address the Parliament. Farage told Van Rompuy to his face that he was a man with “the charisma of a damp rag” — those tea towels on sale at the UKIP meeting in Bath bore Van Rompuy’s face and the words “Genuine Belgian Damp Rag” — and that no one outside Belgium had ever heard of him. It left Van Rompuy in stunned silence and quickly became a YouTube classic.Among those who cheered Farage’s vulgar assault were plenty of Tory M.P.s at Westminster. They are openly rebellious and disloyal to Prime Minister David Cameron and close to UKIP in spirit. Cameron has placated them by promising a referendum on whether or not to stay in the E.U. after the next election.But here is a tangle of paradoxes. Many voters — British and otherwise — use the European elections as a way to vent their spleen against their governments, and conventional politics in general, but then return to the mainstream parties in national elections. However well it does in these European elections, UKIP is still not certain to win any seats at the British general election in a year’s time. And because Labour and Liberal Democrats are opposed to a referendum on European withdrawal, one will be held only if the Conservatives win an absolute majority at Westminster. That doesn’t seem very likely at present — and what makes it less so is the prospect of UKIP stealing votes from the Conservatives and handing the election to Labour.Although UKIP has the E.U. as its central obsession, its support stems from discontent with much broader social and cultural change — a fundamental disquiet with the rapidly shifting face of England. Farage delights some and disgusts others, and yet no one is quite sure what to make of him, or even knows for sure who he is.Nigel Farage was born in 1964, the son of a stockbroker who overcame alcoholism but ultimately left his family. Farage grew up in a village on the North Downs of Kent, where he still lives “within a mile or two,” and not far from Chartwell, the home of Winston Churchill. His is an incantatory name. Like Ronald Reagan and Benjamin Netanyahu before him, Farage enjoys nothing more than to be photographed in front of a portrait of Churchill, who is continually invoked by UKIP speakers — four times in Bath, by my count.Farage went to Dulwich College in south London, an excellent private school with the distinction of having educated P. G. Wodehouse and Raymond Chandler. By his own account, Farage was a noisy and annoying boy, and a letter from his school days recently returned to haunt him. When he was chosen to be a prefect, one of his teachers wrote an objection to the boy’s offensively right-wing opinions. “Of course I said some ridiculous things,” Farage says with a grin and a shrug, “not necessarily racist things.” Grinning and shrugging is something he does often.As a schoolboy, he was already absorbed by politics. He knew the man who ran the Conservative Party in his village, “who’d come back from India in ’47 and who believed in drinks at 6 o’clock in a truly remarkable way,” Farage says with a tinge of admiration. “You know — six or seven large Scotches before dinner!”But his real conversion came after a visit to his school by Sir Keith Joseph, that fascinating Tory, very rich and very clever, who was Margaret Thatcher’s advance guard, the proto-apostle of a revived free-market creed. Farage says he was “so taken by Keith Joseph that I joined the Tory Party at 14.”At 17 he supposed that he would go to college or join the army “and then think about the City” — of London that is, the British Wall Street. But then Margaret Thatcher was elected in 1979. Her government cut taxes, and by 1986 came the so-called Big Bang, the deregulation that quickly transformed the financial sector, for better or worse. Farage heard about the “bright young things” in the City who were “living hard, doing terribly well” and working at a frenetic pace. “I thought, Well, I’ve got to become one of them as quickly as possible.”So he did, joining the London Metal Exchange as a broker. Farage’s book, “Flying Free,” is quite readable by the admittedly low standards of political memoirs. In it, he cheerfully describes his City years, not quite an English Wolf of Wall Street but a lad making money fast through a long day and drinking hard through a long night, marrying, chasing women, divorcing.In 1990, Thatcher was deposed by a party coup, to Farage’s disgust. “The way it was done — and the people that did it,” he snorts. “Chinless bloody nobodies who wouldn’t have existed without her.” In 1992, the Maastricht Treaty turned the European Community into a Union, on paper at least, and conceived the single currency that was adopted by many members 10 years later. Farage was so horrified by this that he joined the group that became UKIP, although he soon fell out with some members.In those days, he not only said but also did some ridiculous things. When he was 21, he spent an argumentative evening in the pub downing beer and Irish whiskey and was hit by a car while walking home. After months of recuperation, he learned that he had testicular cancer, but he was successfully operated on. (He “thanked God” that he’d had “two of them,” and he went on to father two sons by his first wife and then two daughters by his second and present wife, Kirsten Mehr, who is German.)Then, on the day of the last British general election, in 2010, he was in a light aircraft towing a UKIP banner when it crashed. Farage was very lucky to survive, and he turned the disaster into a career move: The title “Flying Free” alludes to the crash, and the back cover features a photograph of the author emerging dazed from the wreckage. That kind of brazen cheerfulness is part of his appeal, along with his act as a man of the people (albeit an expensively educated man whose father was a stockbroker).When the government broke promises last year to set a minimum price for alcohol and to restrict sales of cigarettes, Sarah Wollaston, a family doctor turned Conservative M.P., asked angrily: Who on earth wants to be known as “the party of booze and fags?”Her question is easily answered: UKIP does. Rarely is Farage photographed without a glass of beer in one hand and a cigarette in the other, and he has consistently enjoyed good press — better than he deserves, critics say — because journalists find him convivial and entertaining, which, it’s fair to say, he is.We met at Boisdale, a restaurant that he frequents not far from Victoria Station and that itself deserves critical deconstruction. Much tartan is spread about, but then “the owner is the heir to the chief clanship” of the Macdonalds of Clanranald, Farage assured me. The steaks are man-size, the wine flows freely and there’s a smoking terrace above, which is why Farage particularly likes the place.After we washed down our lunch with Champagne and “this excellent claret,” as he politely called the wine I ordered, we repaired upstairs for another glass of wine and, in his case, several more cigarettes. Political lunches in Washington aren’t like this nowadays.Maybe there’s a connection between Farage’s hail-fellow affability and the antics of his party colleagues: One embarrassing episode after another has suggested that the leader isn’t concentrating on keeping order in the ranks. UKIP calls itself “the libertarian anti-racist party,” and one speaker in Bath said, “If you’re a racist, leave now.” That might all sound like protesting too much, especially when one UKIP member has denounced “the Zionist Jews” and another has told a popular black entertainer that he should live in a “black country.”All that is no more than “saying some silly things on Twitter after a few pints,” Farage says, and anyway these are people of no account in the party. But that can’t excuse the egregious Godfrey Bloom, a UKIP Euro M.P. By way of denouncing overseas aid last summer, Bloom asked why the British were giving money to “Bongo-Bongo-land.” When rebuked, he first said that he had intended “President Bongo of Gabon” (the Gabon president is Ali Bongo Ondimba) and then, on television, that a bongo was “a white antelope that lives in the forest” (they are actually auburn with white stripes).When William F. Buckley was helping to mold the modern American conservative movement more than a half-century ago, his first task, he later said, was to purge the nasty racists and anti-Semites. Farage wants us to believe that he is doing the same. He was eager to tell me that he was speaking the following evening at a meeting organized by The Jewish Chronicle, that he had spoken at mosques several times and that his activists now included a rabbi and a Muslim businessman.Even if you might charitably say that Bloom probably isn’t a real bigot, just a boor and a buffoon, that’s not really much help to Farage if he’s trying to cut a serious political figure. It’s also not his biggest problem. On the face of it, UKIP seems to be a single-issue party, but it is hard to imagine how the obsession with Europe can sustain voter interest in the long run. When UKIP claims that this is the central issue of the day for all British people, it is demonstrably wrong. Polls show that Europe is far down the list of voters’ concerns, after the economy, employment, health care and immigration.To be sure, the European Union is not loved in England today, but then neither is it in most other member states, as a startling continentwide survey has just shown. Asked whether they favored “a more integrated European Union, with more decisions being taken by the E.U.,” only 15 percent of French voters and 12 percent of Germans agreed. And while a mere 5 percent of British voters did, that was exactly the same as in progressive Sweden.What’s odder is that the issue in question, if it is resolved as the party wants, would mean the party’s own destruction. Suppose that UKIP had its way, a referendum were held and the British voted to leave the E.U.? What then for UKIP?It’s true that it does have a ragbag of other policies, some of which resonate even with people who are deeply suspicious of UKIP and allergic to Farage. There is, for instance, UKIP’s opposition to the wind turbines that are now covering the countryside or the Pharaonic plan for a high-speed railway line that will cost untold billions while destroying more of rural England. And there is also its hostility to military intervention.“I would gladly have put on a uniform to fight for the Falklands,” Farage told me, but he and his party opposed Tony Blair’s crusade in Iraq. And it was the cranks of UKIP, rather than the bellicose Labour and Tory Parties, that represented the British public, which never wanted the war. Since then, UKIP has opposed the intervention in Libya and the intervention that might have been in Syria.At the beginning of April, Farage debated on television with Nick Clegg, the leader of the Liberal Democrats, and taunted him for his support for bombing Libya. “The British people have had enough of endless foreign military interventions,” Farage said to loud applause. It was notable that while the mainstream pundits who were there to comment on the debate thought that Clegg won, the public, by way of pollsters, gave the victory to Farage, 68 percent to 27 percent.Much of UKIP’s appeal is resentment at a fast-changing world and yearning for a lost — and no doubt largely imaginary — England, whispering the last enchantments of the 1950s. It may be retrograde, but some of it is harmless. Farage told me that one of the proudest moments of his life was appearing on “Test Match Special,” the BBC radio program covering cricket. Explaining that to American readers is a little like describing the arcane rites of a tribe in the Borneo rain forest, but anyway, a test match, or an international cricket game, say between England and Australia, lasts from 10:30 in the morning to 6 at night for five days running.That means that “T.M.S.,” which seems to have been on air all my life, provides endless opportunity, apart from actual commentary on the play, for old codgers to ruminate, tease one another and exchange anecdotes, all as if time had stood still since Compton and Edrich were batting for England 60 or more years ago.Or even before that. “When I first spoke at UKIP meetings,” Farage told me with a smile, “half the chaps in the audience were wearing Bomber Command ties,” those brave old men no doubt thinking wistfully of the days when they could give more forceful expression to their Euroskepticism by incinerating Hamburg and Berlin.There aren’t many aircrew left, or enough men whose natural habitat is the bar at the golf club to form a real electoral constituency. What the latest research shows, not so surprisingly, is that a large part of UKIP’s support comes from former Labour voters, the old working class, who feel left behind and excluded. “White face, blue collar, gray hair” was one succinct description of these voters.Even if the UKIP voter profile isn’t so much mature as downright elderly, with very few young supporters, that might not be such a disadvantage. In all recent British elections, people over 60 have been far more likely to vote than those under 30, which in itself is quite ominous for the future of democracy.Strange things have been happening in British politics. The old Tory-Labour duopoly is gone (the two parties divided more than 97 percent of the vote between them in 1951, barely 65 percent by 2010), while voting turnout and party membership have plummeted, likewise ominously for democracy: From 1950 to 2001, the percentage of British citizens who voted fell to 59 percent, from 84 percent.Today’s parliamentary leaders of the larger parties — Cameron, Clegg and Ed Miliband of Labour — are all uncharismatic, unexciting and unconvincing. At the same time, far and away the most colorful and provocative politicians of the moment are not in Parliament at all. One is Boris Johnson, the roistering, entertaining and extremely ambitious mayor of London. Another is Alex Salmond, the crafty and formidable leader of the Scottish National Party. And then there is Farage.They might all in their different ways be considered mountebanks, but they appeal to more and more voters who are disenchanted with mainline politics — a disenchantment that has helped Farage personally as well as politically. Quite apart from the political charges, he has been accused of tax avoidance, as well as other shady financial dealings. He employs his wife on the public payroll and was said to have employed a former mistress as well. (Farage has denied this in print.) And none of it matters. Farage almost relishes playing the stage villain, the bounder or rotter, and he sails through it all with the accusations running off him like rain off his waterproof Barbour coat. It’s the same with Johnson, London’s mayor, whose highly eventful sex life doesn’t seem to have damaged him politically at all.If anything, Farage’s brashly rebarbative manner and checkered career have made it too easy for the respectable consensus to dismiss him and to overlook the fact that not everything he says is wrong. The European Union really is bloated, corrupt and undemocratic. Its ruling elite is indeed an unaccountable, self-perpetuating and self-satisfied oligarchy.A single currency embracing countries wildly disparate in economic performance has been a disaster for many, leaving tens of millions of young people in Greece, Spain and Italy with no jobs, no money and no future. The grandiose posturing of that oligarchy in Brussels or Strasbourg is embarrassing in the circumstances. They speak as if the “European Union” were some equivalent of, and rival to, the American Union, when in reality the member states can’t agree on anything from banking policy to Ukraine.In one European country after another, nationalist or nativist or frankly racist parties — and UKIP has had a tinge of all these characteristics — are on the rise. It’s possible that many representatives of such parties will sweep into the European Parliament this week, but if that happens, it will not be good enough to blame those who vote for them. To the contrary, it will be hard not to feel that the complacent Eurocracy had it coming.As for UKIP, it may or may not be a serious political force with a real future, but its rise is a reproach to the mainstream political parties. Next year’s British general election is the hardest to call in many years, with the Tories fractious and contumacious, Labour still baffled by how to deal with the legacy of Blair (“my closest partner and best friend on the world stage,” as George W. Bush so truly called him) and the Lib Dems possibly facing electoral implosion.All of that, and the wild card of UKIP. Nigel Farage and his team of oddballs may not have any very constructive answer to our problems. But as Farage has put it: “If you’re on a train headed for a crash, you get off.”