HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam — The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, courted Vietnam over the past several days. He was the first chairman in more than 40 years to visit the old enemy of Washington, now envisioned as a new partner that will acquire American weapons and help offset the power of China.General Dempsey, who graduated from West Point as the Vietnam War was winding down, never served here, but his visit capped a vibrant effort by the United States and Vietnam to reconnect. A longstanding embargo on lethal weapons sales by the United States is likely to be eased, he said, and Washington would then begin discussions on what equipment Vietnam would buy, most likely in the field of maritime surveillance.Vietnam has suddenly become more important to Washington as the United States and China are increasingly at loggerheads over the South China Sea, one of the world’s most vital trading routes. Vietnam is crucial because of its strategic position bordering China, its large population of nearly 100 million and its long coastline on that sea.“We do think we should have a steady improvement in our relationship with the Vietnamese military,” General Dempsey told reporters here on Saturday. “I would suggest as goes Vietnam in managing its maritime resources and territorial disputes, so goes the South China Sea.”During his three-day visit, General Dempsey met in Hanoi with Vietnam’s most senior officer, Gen. Do Ba Ty, who last year traveled to Washington, where he was entertained at the chairman’s home. General Dempsey visited Vietnamese vessels and met with their crew in Da Nang, once the site of a major American military base. He also inspected an American thermal treatment plant in Da Nang designed to clean up a deadly ingredient in Agent Orange, the defoliant sprayed by the American military over South Vietnam during the Vietnam War.Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who was a prisoner of war in Vietnam, visited Hanoi this month and said the time had come to modify the arms embargo so the United States could help Vietnam with defense abilities.In May, China deployed a sophisticated deep-sea oil rig to disputed waters off the Vietnam coast, a move that resulted in anti-Chinese riots in Vietnam and two months of skirmishes at sea between well-equipped Chinese Coast Guard boats and more rudimentary Vietnamese vessels.While moving closer to Washington, Vietnam, which is ruled by a Communist Party that still values its fraternal relations with Beijing and is locked into economic dependence on China, has indicated it is not about to ditch its powerful northern neighbor.The United States is not trying to force Vietnam to choose between Beijing and Washington, General Dempsey said. “I didn’t come here to focus on China,” he said. “But I recognize inevitably the shadow of China hangs over these conversations.”In China, the government is watching the American dalliance with Vietnam, and it sees the likely easing of the arms embargo as a move against Beijing in the contest over the South China Sea, said Wu Xinbo, the head of the American Studies Center at Fudan University in Shanghai.“The United States is trying to encourage Vietnam to take a tough stance against China on the South China Sea,” he said. “I believe Washington is somewhat concerned about the possible reconciliation between China and Vietnam over the South China Sea dispute.”Who was the more ardent suitor in the wooing between the two former enemies remained an open question. Vietnam was insisting on its own gradual pace of improvement in military relations with the United States, American officials said.Washington could end up disappointed, said Brantly Womack, a professor of foreign affairs at the University of Virginia, who has written extensively about the two countries. Vietnam, Professor Womack said, is acutely aware of the prickly path over the nearly 20 years since normalization of relations with Washington. “They want to tie us in closer, but they don’t want to hang on the string,” he said.Vietnam now buys most of its weapons, including a recent order for six Kilo-class submarines, from Russia. Japan agreed last month to send Vietnam six new Coast Guard vessels.There will be no change in Vietnam’s restriction of only one port visit a year by American naval ships to Vietnam, American officials said. And the possibility of the United States’ having access to Cam Ranh Bay, a strategically significant deepwater port used by the United States during the Vietnam War, is not on the table. Even so, the signs are propitious for a diplomatic tilt toward the United States.A coalition of 10 Vietnamese labor and religious groups presented a letter to Senator McCain during his visit, indicating that they could support a gradual lifting of the arms embargo, if the government released all prisoners of conscience and repealed vague security laws.Initial shipments of American weapons could include surveillance vessels without guns or sophisticated radar, with more advanced weapons slowly phased in as Vietnam improved its human rights record, said Nguyen Quang A, a member of the coalition and a prominent intellectual.Vietnam has a history, he said, of creating military alliances “not against a third country but for protecting our sovereignty.”The American assistant secretary of state for democracy, human rights and labor, Tom P. Malinowski, said Vietnam had taken “positive steps” on human rights in the past six months that would be factored into the final decision on easing the weapons ban.Vietnam has released seven prominent prisoners of conscience, registered 113 church congregations and signed the convention against torture, Mr. Malinowski said. Still, the United States wants it to release all prisoners of conscience, including prominent bloggers and writers given lengthy prison sentences last year.Vietnam’s leadership faced an unusual call for more political openness this month when 61 members of the Communist Party signed a public letter that took aim at the relationship with China. The government should take legal action against China in the international court system for its deployment of the oil rig, the signatories suggested.“When over 60 members of the Communist Party of Vietnam have signed an open letter calling for leaders to ‘develop a truly democratic, law-abiding state,’ it is time to invite Vietnam to free itself of dependence on Russia and China and to encourage further reform,” said Vikram J. Singh, a former United States deputy assistant secretary of defense for South and Southeast Asia who is now vice president for national security at the Center for American Progress in Washington. “This is about dignity and pride, and being treated on par with other countries in the region.”