JAKARTA, Indonesia — Indonesia is saddled with endemic corruption, poverty and shoddy infrastructure. Yet its consumers are among the world’s most optimistic, hopeful that a new government will lift the fortunes of the fourth-most-populous nation and put the economy on a par with emerging powerhouses like China and Brazil.Emblematic of Indonesians’ optimism and the resulting urge to splurge are people like Johannes Komp, a 30-year-old entrepreneur who just started a family. Mr. Komp recently sat behind the wheel of a black Toyota S.U.V. in a showroom atop one of the luxury malls in Jakarta, preparing for a test drive.Business keeps rolling in for Mr. Komp’s office building maintenance company, despite a general economic slowdown. The recent election to the presidency of Joko Widodo, the populist governor of Jakarta and a former businessman, is making Mr. Komp even more confident in the future and more willing to spend, he said. “He’s creating excitement, just like Obama.” Mr. Komp is more worried about driving on Jakarta’s gridlocked roads than he is about dropping $35,000 or more on a new car.That kind of confidence is on display across the country. According to a global measure of consumer confidence by Nielsen, Indonesia is second in confidence only to India, which also has a new leader. About 84 percent of Indonesians surveyed said that they were confident about their personal finances, 76 percent said that they were confident about their job prospects and 57 percent said that they felt now was the time to buy expensive items. National data released this month by the central bank showed that consumer confidence rose in August, compared with July, when the presidential election was held.Indonesia is a country of 250 million people and, by one estimate, its numbers of middle class and wealthy consumers will nearly double to 135 million by 2020. When the departing Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, first took office in 2004, per capita annual income was about $1,100; by the time he leaves office in October, it could reach $4,500.Above and beyond election results, analysts say that rising income levels have given consumers more power to spend, in particular on trendy international brands that flood the market. Culturally, Indonesians are more likely to spend than save. In addition, the country’s transition to democracy from authoritarian rule, beginning in 1999, has most Indonesians thinking their nation is on the right track.“When they have more money, Indonesians buy luxury items whether they need them or not,” said Miranda Natasya, 26, a marketing strategy adviser who recently purchased an iPhone even though she knew she would never use most of its apps. “Everyone else bought it, so I did.”Whether Mr. Joko succeeds in creating policies that translate into tangible economic change depends in large part upon his battle with corruption, the price of commodities and the whims of currency markets.After he takes office on Oct. 20, Mr. Joko faces a number of crucial medium-term challenges, including poverty, inadequate infrastructure and energy subsidies that cost the country tens of billions of dollars annually. Indonesia will also need to address issues in its labor and financial markets. And it will need to learn how to better ride the turbulence in the global economy, according to economists.Mr. Joko, whose rise from boyhood in an urban slum in Central Java Province to victory in Indonesia’s presidential election on July 9 has made him a political phenomenon, has said that the widening gap between the country’s rich and poor is one of its most pressing problems. Indonesia has about 100 million people living on $2 a day or less, and income levels for poor Indonesians are rising at a slower pace than for middle-class and affluent Indonesians.Mr. Joko has promised more “people-centric” government programs, including expansion of free public health care and increased funding for the education of Indonesia’s poor. Those issues resonated with voters during the presidential campaign.He also promised to provide low-income families a monthly stipend of one million rupiah, or about $85, to establish a special bank to support farmers and to open up nearly 2.5 million acres of land for the agricultural sector, the country’s biggest employer.Indonesian government spending on social assistance programs for poor and vulnerable households was only 0.7 percent of gross domestic product in 2013, compared with an average of 1.5 percent of G.D.P. among Latin American countries. Also last year, Indonesia spent only 0.9 percent of G.D.P. on health programs.“Truly important challenges have arrived to this country,” said Rodrigo Chaves, the Indonesia country director for the World Bank. “Whether Indonesia can become rich before it becomes old should be on the minds of the new government and the public.”Despite a decade-long official fight against corruption, Indonesia remains among the most corrupt countries in Asia, according to Transparency International. Graft is thought to reduce Indonesia’s underlying or potential economic growth rate by two percentage points, the World Bank has estimated.On the economic front, commodities account for about 60 percent of Indonesian exports, but global prices have fallen, and the rupiah remains weak. The country also has a current-account deficit, meaning the value of imports outweighs that of exports, and inflation worries.Gita Wirjawan, who until recently served as Indonesia’s trade minister, said that the country’s economic growth during the last five years had been driven by strong commodities cycles and low interest rates. He said this would not recur anytime soon after Mr. Joko took office.He also said that as high as Indonesia’s consumer confidence has been, it has nowhere to go but down.“You need to put some realism into the story of Jokowi,” Mr. Gita said, referring to Mr. Joko by his popular nickname.Any problems that may lie ahead have failed to dent Indonesians’ optimism and willingness to spend. Indonesians' love affair with consumerism was clearly on display recently at a luxury shopping mall in South Jakarta. The mall’s management had erected billboards for shoppers to post personal visions for the future on brightly colored cards that had been available since before the end of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan in July.“The target is to buy a house!” one person wrote on a blue card. Another card, colored hot pink, read: “I will make more money from home than I would from an office – hail entrepreneurialism!”On another billboard, a purple card screamed out: “I’m getting a BMW!”“Our economy is driven by consumers,” said Muhammad Ikhwan Muslimin, the manager of a local securities firm, as he window-shopped at a car dealership. “People buy, buy, buy.”Muhammad Irfan, an executive with Bentley Indonesia, said that his company had sold 15 of the luxury vehicles in 2013 and was set to break that mark this year with the new Flying Spur, which sells at its showroom in Jakarta for 8.9 billion rupiah — or about $742,000.“I’ve very optimistic,” he said. “Maybe it’s because the results of the presidential election will bring even more investors into Indonesia”In the end, Mr. Komp walked away from the Toyota S.U.V. in the Jakarta showroom. The reason: He wants the cash to hire more employees and expand his business.“I’m very optimistic,” he said. “What’s there not to be optimistic about?”