JERUSALEM —  At times, he seemed like a tour guide leading a study-abroad trip. At others, he was afforded all the trappings of a visiting head of state.On a visit to Israel over two days this week, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo left behind a central tenet of his administration: New York is the only subject to be discussed, and national or international affairs are better left to politicians in those arenas.When he is in Albany, the rules are clear and inviolable. Mr. Cuomo steadfastly declines to discuss what happens in the state of New Jersey, let alone to weigh in on the latest developments in intractable international conflicts.“I’m not that big a world traveler,” he said a few hours after arriving here on Wednesday. “I think this is going to be my last trip for a while. You know, I’m nervous what happens when I leave the state.”But Mr. Cuomo’s whirlwind tour of Israel, his first foreign expedition as governor, was striking for how much it departed from those rules: He was not only leaving New York, but also willfully stepping into diplomatic quicksand.After all, as governor, Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, has not faced questions about the particulars of achieving peace in the Middle East. Until this week, perhaps his most prominent action in that realm had been marching in the Celebrate Israel Parade in Manhattan.Nor has he cleared his schedule to deal with issues that extend beyond New York’s borders. Israeli officials tried to arrange a meeting between the governor and Israel’s ambassador to the United States, Ron Dermer, in January, according to records obtained by The New York Times under the state’s Freedom of Information Law; Mr. Cuomo’s office said he could not squeeze him in.But this week, Mr. Cuomo embraced the role of diplomat, though it was not without political sensitivities. His visit, his first trip to Israel since 2002, came during a period of significant tension between Israel and the White House. A meeting between the governor and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Wednesday was rescheduled to accommodate a phone call between President Obama and Mr. Netanyahu.Mr. Cuomo was careful to stay out of the fray, saying he had heard only expressions of gratitude from Israeli officials. “To the extent you heard any complaints, I think it’s natural,” he said.“This is a country at war, and they want friends, and they want friends who are standing up loudly, so sometimes in a situation like this, there’s nothing that you can do that’s enough, and that’s why we literally got on a plane and came and wanted to show up.”At a dinner with the United States ambassador to Israel and Jerusalem’s mayor, Mr. Cuomo spoke at length about the fighting in Gaza and how Israel was being perceived abroad.But in public, the governor stuck largely to the message at the center of his trip: solidarity with Israel. Those seeking insight into the foreign policy platform of a future President Cuomo were not given much from which to extrapolate. His analysis of Hamas, the militant group that dominates Gaza, was spare.“They’re against Israel because Israel is a democracy,” the governor said. “The United States is a democracy. And those that oppose democracy oppose Israel here in the Middle East, and they oppose us.”Asked why he thought Israel had drawn such withering international criticism over a military operation that it has characterized as a matter of self-defense, he largely pleaded ignorance.  “I don’t know,” he said. “I think there’s an attitude that Israel is the more powerful. Maybe it’s we root for the underdog.”The trip itself was, above all else, hurried. By the time he left on Thursday, Mr. Cuomo’s time on the ground in Israel — about 29 hours — was not much longer than the time he spent flying here and back.He was followed to Israel by what The Jerusalem Post described as a “huge Big Apple press corps,” although parts of the trip were off-limits to reporters. When he met with Mr. Netanyahu, for instance, they offered only a few minutes of introductory remarks before going behind closed doors. No questions were permitted.But the parts of the trip that resembled sightseeing were unscripted — a contrast with the governor’s public appearances in New York, which tend to lack spontaneous interactions.At times, Mr. Cuomo even played the role of tour guide, informing reporters of various facts he had learned about the workings of Israel’s antimissile system and the layout of the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, a holy site in the Old City of Jerusalem.In the past, Mr. Cuomo, who is seeking re-election in November, has described his singular focus on New York as a way of discouraging speculation that he might pursue the presidency.But given his interest in subjects like missile defense and secret tunnels under the border with Gaza — issues that do not come up too often in Albany — the trip at least raised the question of whether Mr. Cuomo might eventually have broader aspirations.“What a subtle question,” Mr. Cuomo said, looking amused. He did not offer an answer, so a second reporter repeated the question. Mr. Cuomo chuckled, then made a factual statement. “I’m running for governor of the State of New York,” he said.Before the trip, Mr. Cuomo endured his toughest stretch as governor, drawing fierce criticism over his handling of an anticorruption panel called the Moreland Commission.But he mocked suggestions that the troubles he faced in New York had prompted him to travel here. “It’s that,” the governor said, “or a war.”