WARSAW —  “Poland is the most pro-American country in the world — including the United States,” goes a quip, well known here, from an American foreign policy expert more than a decade ago.“Yes,” Marcin Zaborowski, director of the Polish Institute of International Affairs, said a little ruefully last week. “We had long periods like that. But not so much now.”Poland is still a warm haven of pro-American sentiments, as President Obama will no doubt feel when he revisits Warsaw on Tuesday. But after more than a decade in which Poland has shifted from a Washington-centric focus to an increasingly vigorous engagement in the European Union, the intensity of that love affair has diminished.“There is not a feeling of anti-Americanism in Poland,” said Aleksander Smolar, president of the Stefan Batory Foundation, which promotes democracy and civic issues. “I would rather speak about the temperature of feeling. It had been very high, but now the temperature is lower.”Even Michael Mandelbaum, the Johns Hopkins University foreign policy expert who delivered the quip about Poland, agrees that the country President Obama will encounter is not the same one he described.“The national focus shifted from international politics and security to economics,” Mr. Mandelbaum wrote in an email last week. “The generation that came to maturity after the end of Communism wouldn’t have the same feelings as their parents, feelings summed up in my quote, because the world in which they have lived is a very different one.”Poland’s relationship with the United States is still seen as a crucial one here, most notably in terms of national security and especially in light of recent Russian aggression in neighboring Ukraine. But with Warsaw’s growing focus on Europe, the United States has drifted out of the conversation.“It is not anti-Americanism,” said Bohdan Szklarski, director of the American Studies Center at the University of Warsaw. “No one is burning Americans in effigy. Diplomats and American citizens can travel in safety.”People simply talk less about America. “Now, all the weekly papers are pro-European, and the focus of our attention has shifted from Washington to Brussels and Berlin,” said Michal Sutowski, a 29-year-old commentator for the left-leaning movement, Krytyka Polityczna. “You look at TV news now, and it is all about Europe.”What happened, Mr. Smolar said, was that Poland’s entry into the European Union in 2004, and the subsequent ability of Poles to travel freely throughout the Continent for the first time, have made the United States less attractive both as a romantic ideal and as a place where Poles dream of living.Entry into the European Union pushed Poland to adopt European norms, from human rights to cleanliness standards in restaurants. Poles rapidly saw the benefits in such things as better roads and glittery malls.“The E.U. became seen as a way of getting rich and respectable, though we continued to be connected to the U.S. for security,” Mr. Smolar said. “We began to realize that, for 90 percent of the problems we have, the solution is in Europe, not in America.”Still, signs of love for the United States are prevalent in Warsaw. “American-style” hot dogs and hamburgers are advertised in shop windows. The T-shirts worn on the streets by young Warsovians predominantly bear English words and American marketing slogans, as do shop windows in the upscale districts. A street festival last weekend in the fashionable neighborhood of Saska Kepa began with a Harley Davidson parade; its leader wore a Stars and Stripes helmet and a huge American flag on the back of his leather jacket.“My generation, we remember Communism, remember the Soviet presence here, remember the system under which we could not travel,” Mr. Zaborowski said. “But the younger generation is now traveling throughout Europe.”Indeed, Mr. Sutowski said his sole memory of the Communist years was standing in line one time with his grandmother to buy meat.“Young people today, when they think about emigrating, they think of London or Ireland,” he said. “Young Poles are not anti-American. But America as a symbol of freedom? We do not think that way. We have no such strong sentimental feelings. It is a more calculated thing.”Mikolaj Jasiak, a 28-year-old Warsaw lawyer, said that even so, there is still a philosophical communion between young Poles and Americans. “We are much less anti-American than Western Europeans,” he said. “I think that is because all of us in Poland are more concerned about security, but also because we are a new market economy, so people tend to be more individualistic, like Americans, and not collectivist, like the rest of Europe.”At a fragrant tea shop in the city’s affluent Mokotow neighborhood, Mr. Szklarski opened his laptop. He had a copy of an unpublished government survey of Polish attitudes toward the United States that he said he was not authorized to release, but he shared some of the findings.When Poles were asked what came to mind when they thought about the United States, the most common answers were military might (26 percent) and wealth (18 percent). Only 6 percent thought of America as “an island of democracy and freedom,” he said, the same percentage who responded “obesity and rampant consumerism.”Mr. Szklarski shrugged. “We are difficult to handle, we Poles,” he said. “We are touchy. And our two countries, well, we don’t communicate too well.”Mr. Zaborowski, the Polish institute director, said he expected the United States’ popularity here to rise significantly — he has already seen signs of it, he said — as a consequence of Russia’s actions in Ukraine, which moved national security back to the fore of the Polish discussion.“The U.S.’s rather strong reaction to that made people here realize the role of America is utterly indispensable in Europe,” he said.For Mr. Smolar, a root of the problem is “a dangerous mythology in the minds of many Poles for many years that Poland was a privileged partner of the United States, that we would get special consideration.”Poles believed the American talk about the shared values and brotherly connection between the two nations, he said, so when larger American interests — like reassuring Russia or engaging with Asia — trumped Polish desires, the country felt snubbed, even humiliated.Part of the problem, he said, was that the terms “partner” and “ally” were used interchangeably in describing the countries’ relationship. But they are not the same thing, he said: An ally offers international support and sheds blood in a crisis, while a partner shares in the profits.“You were saying partners when you really meant allies,” Mr. Smolar said. “While we said ally when we really meant partner.”