BANGKOK —  Tens of thousands of supporters of Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra demonstrated on the outskirts of Bangkok on Saturday, part of a three-day rally aimed at countering months of sometimes violent antigovernment protests.In their largest show of force in months, the government supporters, known informally as the Red Shirts, said they were prepared to thwart any move to dismiss Ms. Yingluck, who faces mounting legal cases that could lead to her removal from office in coming weeks.Leaders of the movement, officially called the United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship, said they were not seeking a fight with the thousands of critics of the government holding their own rally at their headquarters in Lumpini Park, near Bangkok’s financial district.“This is about showing our strength and to warn the elite that we will not accept it if Yingluck is removed by the courts,” said one of the group’s leaders, Jatuporn Promphan.Government supporters accuse Ms. Yingluck’s enemies of plotting a judicial coup. The courts have been unusually active in recent weeks, and Ms. Yingluck looks increasingly hemmed in.The struggle pits the mostly poorer, rural supporters of Ms. Yingluck and her brother, former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, against antigovernment protesters from Bangkok and the south backed by the conservative elite.Those protesting the government, mainly urban and middle-class Thais, want to replace Ms. Yingluck with an interim government to help usher in broad political and electoral changes.Ms. Yingluck’s supporters say they will not accept a new prime minister appointed by the conservative establishment.On Wednesday, the Constitutional Court accepted a case against Ms. Yingluck lodged by 27 senators who say she abused power when she transferred the national security chief in 2011.Ms. Yingluck has been given 15 days to defend herself before the court. If found guilty, she faces removal from office.She also faces charges of negligence brought against her by the National Anti-Corruption Commission in connection with a government rice-buying scheme that has run up huge losses. She could be impeached if the case is forwarded to the Senate.