A group of news organizations sued the Missouri Department of Corrections on Thursday, arguing that the department is violating the First Amendment by refusing to identify the sources of lethal drugs used in its executions.Government secrecy surrounding the cocktail of drugs used in lethal injections has become a deeply contested fight between states, on the one hand, and defense lawyers and news organizations on the other. In Louisiana, state legislators are trying to pass a bill that would keep confidential information about companies that supply drugs for executions. A similar bill passed last year in Georgia.The lawsuit was filed in the district court in Cole County, which includes Jefferson City, the state capital, and was brought by The Associated Press, The Guardian and three newspapers in Missouri. It charges that prisoners are routinely executed using “a secret drug formulation obtained from secret sources.” The practice denies the public its rightful access to important information about the criminal justice system, the news organizations said.“There’s certainly been a lot more secrecy around the drugs used in legal injections,” said Richard Dieter, the executive director of the Death Penalty Information Center in Washington. “This is the boldest and biggest attempt to have the states reveal the sources of their drugs.”State governments have defended the practice, saying they are trying to protect the confidentiality of the compounding pharmacies that mix lethal drugs and provide them to the states.The states are also trying to preserve their own pipeline to the drugs. Companies that have provided lethal drugs for executions have often been subjected to unwelcome scrutiny and negative publicity once their names have become public.The botched execution of Clayton D. Lockett in Oklahoma on April 29 has brought new urgency to efforts to obtain information about where states are obtaining the cocktails of drugs used to carry out the death penalty. Mr. Lockett’s execution went awry when a dose of sedatives was apparently not delivered properly, causing him to writhe on the gurney and gasp in agony. It was widely condemned as inhumane, a violation of the Constitution’s prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment.Thirty-two states currently have the death penalty. Three more states — Maryland, Connecticut and New Mexico — have banned the death penalty, but not retroactively, leaving prisoners to remain on death row. Most states in the Midwest and Northeast have abolished the death penalty entirely.The lawsuit contends that the disclosure of drug sources “promotes the functioning of the process itself and is essential for democracy to function.” It added, “The public cannot meaningfully debate the propriety of lethal injection executions if it is denied access to this essential information about how individuals are being put to death by the state.”The Guardian spearheaded the lawsuit, but after Mr. Lockett’s execution, it was joined by The Associated Press, The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, The Kansas City Star and The Springfield News-Leader. The news organizations said the Department of Corrections had routinely provided information on the drugs, but “unilaterally changed course” in October 2013 and began to deny access. Since then, six Missouri inmates have been executed, without the state’s “revealing the source or quality of the drugs used to inflict death.”The Department of Corrections has responded to requests for information by invoking the state’s so-called Black Hood Law, which protects the identities of people who provide direct support to executions, the lawsuit said. The department did not return a phone call on Thursday.