HONG KONG —  The videotaped beating of a Hong Kong democracy advocate, apparently by the police, opened a new political fault line in the city on Wednesday, adding to volatile tensions between protesters who have occupied major roads for weeks and the beleaguered government.The video of the advocate, Ken Tsang, being kicked and beaten in a predawn melee, along with pictures of his bruised body, became an emotion-laden focus for critics of the government after a night of mayhem near the city’s heart. They gave a face to accusations that pro-democracy demonstrators have been targeted by an overzealous police force.A video filmed by TVB, a usually pro-government television station, showed a bearded man in a black T-shirt being led away by officers in civilian clothes and black police vests, his hands behind him. The video then jumps to a scene in which a man lying on the ground is kicked and hit many times by several figures who appear to be police officers. TVB said the beating had lasted about four minutes.Outside the North Point Police Station on Wednesday night, Mr. Tsang said he had been “brutally” assaulted by the police during the protest and again at the police station. He said that, because he might pursue legal action, he would not make further comments or answer questions.He lifted his shirt to reveal several circular marks the size of bottle caps on his back and bruises on his chest. There were also bruises on his face.At a rally in the Admiralty district on Wednesday night, thousands of protesters heard Joshua Wong, an 18-year-old student leader, criticize the police. “The police were no different than thugs,” he said to raucous cheers.Ronny Tong, a Civic Party member of Hong Kong’s Legislative Council, said, “I thought a situation like this would only be seen in foreign countries, other societies — I didn’t expect to see it in Hong Kong.”Organizers of the street demonstrations that have occupied parts of Hong Kong for more than two weeks called for a show of popular strength and support for Mr. Tsang on Wednesday night at the main protest site in the Admiralty neighborhood.“They haven’t faced the facts,” said Alvin Kwok, 27, a special-education instructor, who was at a smaller protest Wednesday night. “The police beating is totally inappropriate, and today the feedback from the government — it’s nothing.”The Hong Kong government said Mr. Tsang had been caught up in a tumult after the police retook a tunnel that protesters had occupied and barricaded on a major road near the city leader’s office.Hui Chun-tak, a spokesman for the Hong Kong police, said the protesters had behaved aggressively toward the police, tossing objects onto the road from a highway overpass, charging the police lines, kicking officers and hitting them with umbrellas. One officer dislocated a shoulder when he was pushed to the ground by a protester, and another was injured in the eye by an umbrella, Mr. Hui said.In another episode captured on local television, a man in a black T-shirt is seen standing on a high wall and throwing a stream of water from a bottle onto officers below. Two other demonstrators grab him to stop him, and they appear to have an argument. The black T-shirt worn by the man throwing water looks identical to the one worn by the man being beaten.Now TV, another local television station, reported that Mr. Tsang had thrown the water. Dennis Kwok, a lawyer for Mr. Tsang, said he did not know if that was true.Mr. Hui said the authorities would conduct an “impartial and fair investigation” into the allegations of police brutality. The city’s leader, Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying, told reporters that Hong Kong would follow established procedures regarding complaints about police behavior.Mr. Leung has rejected the protesters’ demands for electoral reforms that would allow his successors to be chosen by popular vote. He defended the Chinese government’s position that only limited changes be made that would still allow the Communist Party to choose who can run for chief executive.The treatment of Mr. Tsang had such intense political reverberations because it exemplifies what the protesters see as the absence of publicly accountable political leadership in Hong Kong, said Steve Tsang, a professor of contemporary Chinese studies at the University of Nottingham in England. Tsang is a common surname, and the two men are not related.“This is exactly the kind of problem that people are worried about,” said Professor Tsang. “People are also very worried because Hong Kong’s chief executives have all failed.”The Civic Party, one of the main pro-democracy political parties in Hong Kong, said the beaten democracy advocate was a party member and volunteer social worker who specialized in helping street children. “At the Civic Party, we’ve all known him for a long time, and we are all shocked,” said Audrey Eu, the party’s chairwoman and a former legislator. “He’s actually quite a gentle soul.”Mr. Kwok said that a team of pro-democracy lawyers had met with 10 or 15 of the 45 people arrested during the tunnel demonstration, and that five or six of those had also complained of having been slapped or punched. But none appeared to have been injured to the same extent as Mr. Tsang, Mr. Kwok said.Mr. Kwok said that his client had been accused of unlawful assembly and of obstructing a police officer. Under Hong Kong law, Mr. Tsang must be brought before a magistrate or released within 48 hours.Pro-democracy demonstrators quickly distributed the video of the beating. “It’s totally uncontrolled — they are no longer our police,” said Anthony Ho, a 54-year-old Internet technician, as he sat at a protest site in the Mong Kok neighborhood.The Hong Kong police have a highly professional image that dates from the territory’s days as a British colony. The 28,000-strong force still has about 100 British-born officers.In the last year, however, Beijing has sent growing numbers of its own security officials to work closely with the local police, partly in preparation for dealing with democracy demonstrations like the ones that have nearly paralyzed large areas of the city.Mainland security officials have a reputation for much rougher tactics, but there was no evidence on Wednesday morning that they were directly involved in the beating.