ISTANBUL —  It is a sign of the difficulty of banning Twitter in the age of Twitter that within hours of the Turkish government’s attempt to block the social media site, President Abdullah Gul was one of thousands of Turks who protested the ban — using Twitter.“Shutting down social media platforms cannot be approved,” Mr. Gul posted on Twitter on Friday, adding that “it is not technically possible to fully block access to globally active platforms like Twitter, anyway.”While Turkey, a predominantly Muslim country of 79 million people, has long sought to portray itself as a model of democracy in a restive region, critics both inside and outside the country denounced the government’s ban as a “digital coup” more befitting China or North Korea. They, too, of course, did so over Twitter.Echoing outrage from across the world, Neelie Kroes, vice president of the European Commission, the European Union’s executive body, wrote on Twitter that “The Twitter ban in #Turkey is groundless, pointless, cowardly. Turkish people and intl community will see this as censorship. It is.”At the very least, it seemed a clear attempt to shoot the digital messenger, as Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan grows increasingly frustrated with how social media networks have been used to fan a scandal that now presents perhaps the biggest challenge to his authority since he came to power 11 years ago.Since December, when a corruption investigation ensnared government officials and businessmen, including his son, critics of the prime minister who are often anonymous have used social media to leak a barrage of phone calls and documents.Some of the leaks were connected to efforts by Mr. Erdogan to control the media in Turkey, where, according to the New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists, 40 journalists were in jail in 2013. The prime minister was accused of making personal calls to media executives and seeking to have vocal critics fired. The government called most of the recordings fakes, although independent analysts said they were authentic.One recording was said to be of the prime minister telling his son to get rid of large sums of cash on Dec. 17, when the homes of three former ministers’ sons were raided. Mr. Erdogan has repeatedly — and angrily — insisted that the recording was fake.In the aftermath of a stream of leaks, Mr. Erdogan threatened to ban YouTube and Facebook, saying they were being used by supporters of a pro-Islamic rival group led by Fethullah Gulen, a Pennsylvania-based cleric, to unfairly smear him.Finally fed up, Mr. Erdogan tried to shut Twitter down on Thursday — 10 days before important local elections — after lashing out at the social network at a rally in the western town of Bursa, saying that he did not care about international reaction if national security was at stake.“Twitter, mwitter!” (the rough equivalent of “Twitter, schmitter!”) Mr. Erdogan said. “We will root out all. They say, ‘Sir, the international community can say this, can say that.’ I don’t care at all. Everyone will see how powerful the state of the Republic of Turkey is.”Nonetheless, the ban appeared to backfire, fomenting a loud and raucous backlash on Twitter, with the hashtags #TwitterisblockedinTurkey, #occupytwitter, #turkeyblockedtwitter, and #dictatorerdogan quickly becoming popular trending topics globally.According to Twitturk, which records the statistics of Turkey’s roughly 12 million Twitter users, more than half a million tweets were posted in just 10 hours, despite the ban. Statista, a New York statistics portal, lists Turkey as the fourth-largest Twitter community in the world after the United States, Britain and Japan.One posting circulated featuring a flock of Twitter’s blue birds pounding Mr. Erdogan’s head with bird excrement. Another superimposed the prime minister’s face on a campaign poster of President Obama, with the slogan, “Yes we ban.”Mr. Erdogan’s suspicion of the social media became acute last summer when tens of thousands of Turks used the networks to organize street protests of plans to raze Gezi Park in Istanbul. The protests became a powerful symbol of the conflict between what many Turks view as Mr. Erdogan’s creeping authoritarianism and a young urban middle class seeking greater social freedoms.The social media networks have only grown more popular since then as the government tried to silence traditional media outlets critical of Mr. Erdogan. New Internet restrictions, adopted by the government in February, allowed for the swift closing of websites or removal of content by court order.The Twitter ban was the latest step, though hundreds of thousands of Turks had been able to circumvent the ban by using text messaging service. Messages posted on Friday rejoiced in creative means of sharing information offline about how Turks can alter Domain Name System settings on their devices to allow them to circumvent the ban. Others had disguised the location of their computers by using programs that redirect traffic to servers outside of Turkey.“It seems that there is some pivotal information that the government does not wish to spread over the Internet,” said Soli Ozel, a professor of international relations at Kadir Has University in Istanbul. “It’s actually highly irrational when you consider it is impossible to stop social media networks. My son breached the ban in 15 seconds.”Government officials have also sought to justify the attempted blocking by saying that Twitter had been used to invade privacy. The Turkish telecommunications authority said on Friday that the site had been blocked after citizens complained that their privacy had been breached. After Twitter refused to remove some content, the authority said, “there was no other choice.”Mr. Gul, despite being an erstwhile close ally of Mr. Erdogan, has in recent months taken a more moderate stance when it comes to personal freedoms, even as he has approved some of the prime minister’s moves to restrict Internet access in the name of assuring privacy.Opposition groups threatened legal challenges. The Turkish Bar Association took the matter to court on Friday, saying the blocking was unconstitutional and was in breach of the European Convention on Human Rights.“We stand with our users in Turkey who rely on Twitter as a vital communications platform,” the company said in a Twitter message on Friday. “We hope to have full access return soon.”In earlier messages, Twitter urged people to use mobile connections to get access.In a statement on Friday, the United States State Department said “today’s shutdown of Twitter is contrary to Turkey’s own expressed desire to uphold the highest standards of democracy,” and urged the government to ensure that citizens had free access to all social media platforms.At the Buster Internet cafe in Istanbul, a student, Engin Alturk, said the prohibition had only encouraged people to post more messages. “We lived without YouTube for a year; we know all the tricks to get around this,” he added. “Erdogan must think us stupid.”