FRONT PAGEAn article on Thursday about the presence of warlords in Afghanistan’s elections, who are either running for office or are associated with candidates, misidentified, in some editions, the spokesman for Ashraf Ghani, a presidential candidate. He is Hameedullah Farooqi, not Fraidoon Barekzai.INTERNATIONALAn article on Feb. 8 about the persistence of extremist violence in Tunisia that for many Tunisians has cast into doubt the government’s pledges to bolster the weak economy and fledgling democracy referred imprecisely to a distinction held by the country. While it is considered the smallest country of North Africa, that distinction is based on its land mass. (Others are smaller in population.)•A reporting credit on Thursday with an article about efforts by the new government of Ukraine to win the support of the people who forced President Viktor F. Yanukovych from office misspelled the surname of a contributor and misidentified the city from which she reported. She is Oksana Lyachynska, not Lyachnyska, and she contributed from Kiev, not New York.SPORTSBecause of an editing error, an article in some editions on Friday about the Rangers’ 2-1 victory over the Blackhawks referred incorrectly to the performance of Rangers goaltender Cam Talbot. It was his third shutout in his 18th game in the N.H.L., not his third in his 18th game since he was acquired from the Islanders. The article also misidentified the player who was recently acquired from the Islanders. He is Blackhawks center Peter Regin, not Talbot. The article also misstated the number of Blackhawks players in uniform Thursday who played in the Sochi Olympics and the total number of players in uniform Thursday who played in Sochi. It was 9, not 10, so the total was 15, not 16. The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.