FRANKFURT — It has been derided as a hot tub party for world leaders and praised as an emblem of post-Cold War collegiality. Nearly 35 years after it was born in a chateau outside Paris, it still has no public phone number, website or e-mail address.Yet the Group of 7 summit meeting has endured, and while almost as famous for its gaffes as for its achievements, it is still the only forum where leaders of the world’s wealthiest nations meet each other once a year to grapple with the most intractable geopolitical issues.Now the G-7 seems almost to have come full circle, from its origins in the wake of the Vietnam War to a new era of retrenchment and tension with Russia.Russia’s annexation of the Crimean Peninsula prompted the other seven members to refuse to come to Sochi, where Vladimir V. Putin had prepared ostentatious lodgings for the visiting leaders. Instead they will go to Brussels, the somewhat dour capital of the European Union. The forum, which has also been known as the G-6 or the G-8, depending on the size of the guest list, is once again a group of seven. The hot tub has grown frigid.“We’re certainly into a new phase,” said John J. Kirton, director of the G8  Research Group at the University of Toronto.It was no accident, Mr. Kirton said, that in a statement in March declaring their intention not to come to Sochi, the United States and the other six members used language nearly identical to the founding communiqué in 1975. On both occasions the members spoke of “shared beliefs and shared responsibilities,” affirming their image of themselves as a bulwark of democracy.“There is clearly an underlying devotion to those deep fundamentals at a time, then and now, of setbacks,” Mr. Kirton said.The summit meeting has suffered ups and downs before, and in recent years has struggled to remain relevant amid the emergence of new economic powers. To some, the more important forum is the G-20, a G-7 spinoff of sorts that includes newer economic powers like China, India and Brazil.“The G-20 is more meaningful in terms of who is around the table,” said Pascal Lamy, a former director general of the World Trade Organization, who served in the 1980s and 1990s as the French sherpa, the term for officials who prepare the summit meetings and report directly to their national leaders.Now that tension with Russia is once again high, the G-7 may have an opportunity to reassert its claim to be a force for democracy. Unlike the G-20, the G-7 does not include any authoritarian governments, and it is a more manageable size.The G-20, Mr. Lamy said in a telephone interview, “has become very inefficient and too big,” though he also expressed doubt about the G-7’s effectiveness.The G-7 was originally a European idea. In 1975, Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, president of France, and Helmut Schmidt, chancellor of West Germany, invited leaders of the United States, Britain, Japan and Italy to the Château de Rambouillet, outside Paris. Canada joined a year later to make seven.The world was very different. The United States had just lost the Vietnam War. Soon afterward the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan. East Germany was still a country, Communists served in the Italian cabinet, and the world was far less connected.“You didn’t pick up your cellphone and dial Japan,” Robert Fauver, who served as sherpa for several American presidents, recalled in a 2004 lecture. “It was a long, complicated process. Connections were bad. It wasn’t easy to carry on international conversations. So the leaders in 1973 or 1974 did not have the exchanges on a daily or weekly basis that they do today.”The Soviet Union, and its place in the summit meeting, has long been a focal point of debate. It first took part in 1991 when President Mikhail S. Gorbachev attended. When Boris Yeltsin succeeded Mr. Gorbachev after the collapse of the Soviet Union, President Bill Clinton and other leaders tried to accommodate his desire to be treated as more of an equal. Russia formally joined in 1998 to create the G-8.According to Mr. Kirton of the University of Toronto, G-8 leaders used the summit meetings to consult with Russia about the expansion of NATO to the Russian border and enlargement of the European Union to include Baltic states once part of the Soviet Union. Mr. Kirton said he did not buy the argument made by some analysts that Mr. Putin’s aggressive behavior toward Ukraine was the result of American and European insensitivity to Russian security concerns.Over the years, leaders used the summit meetings to address a wide variety of common concerns, like energy, financial stability, trade barriers and terrorism. The sherpas who did the prep work were supposed to report directly to national leaders, to make communication as personal as possible.Mr. Lamy said that what he called a “mafia of sherpas,” with each other’s mobile phone numbers, was a valuable mechanism for maintaining high-level dialogue. But he complained that the original idea of the summit meetings as fireside chats among the world’s most powerful elected leaders has been overwhelmed by bureaucracy.True, the forum never established a central administration and thus has no public phone number, e-mail address or website. The countries involved preferred to deal directly with each other rather than create a United Nations-style secretariat.But the summit meetings have become huge operations, with platoons of aides and security personnel, which critics say is out of proportion to what the meetings actually achieve. “If you look at costs versus results it’s not very efficient,” Mr. Lamy said.Often, the meetings have been defined by their most embarrassing moments, as in 2006 when President George Bush gave Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany an impromptu shoulder rub. Her shocked reaction became a YouTube hit. Or in 2011, when Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian prime minister, harangued a visibly uncomfortable President Barack Obama with complaints about what he said was a conspiracy against him by Italian judges.Mr. Kirton has argued that, if the summit meetings often failed, it was because the easy problems were solved by lower-ranking staff members and the tough issues rose to the top. If nothing else, the meetings have been an opportunity for leaders to exert peer pressure. Despite Mr. Putin’s bluster, he had staked a considerable amount of prestige on the aborted Sochi summit meeting, including outfitting eight lavish mansions to house the visiting leaders.Ultimately, Mr. Kirton argued, Mr. Putin needs the G-7/G-8 as a forum to discuss issues like terrorism, the spread of AIDS, civil war in Syria or disruptions in the global food supply, which threaten Russia as much as or more than any of the other participants. “They of course say they don’t care, but they do for a number of reasons,” he said. “I don’t think we’ve lost Russia for good.”