ROME —  A court in Milan held a sentencing hearing on Thursday for former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, who was convicted of tax fraud in 2012.Mr. Berlusconi, 77, had originally been sentenced to four years in prison, but that was reduced to one year under a law aimed at controlling prison overcrowding. Because of his age, he is unlikely to face any time behind bars. Instead, the court may choose to place him under house arrest or allow him to do community service, as his legal team has requested.During the hearing on Thursday, the state prosecutor did not oppose the defense’s request for community service, the Italian news agency ANSA reported. The Italian news media has speculated in recent days that Mr. Berlusconi could serve his time as a volunteer at a senior citizens’ home, or working with people with disabilities.The president of the court said it would make a decision within 15 days, but not before next week, ANSA reported.With the European Parliament elections just six weeks away, Mr. Berlusconi’s political allies were hoping for a decision that would allow Mr. Berlusconi to continue to campaign for them, albeit with restrictions.For weeks, political analysts have debated how Mr. Berlusconi’s legal troubles will affect the political prospects of his Forza Italia party, and whether after 20 years in the political limelight, the time had come for him to step aside. With no clear successor in sight for his fractious center-right grouping, Mr. Berlusconi remains, for now, firmly at the helm.“He remains the DNA of this party,” Giovanni Toti, a leading member of Forza Italia, said on a television talk show Thursday afternoon.But analysts note that since Mr. Berlusconi’s conviction was upheld last year, Forza Italia has struggled to hold its ground. At the same time, the fortunes of others have risen — particularly those of Italy’s energetic young prime minister, Matteo Renzi, and Beppe Grillo, the leader of the anti-establishment Five Star Movement, which has capitalized on voter discontent.Fearing further political fallout from an out-of-action leader, Mr. Berlusconi’s supporters have contended that his incarceration would be a blow to democracy. One of his most loyal allies, Renato Brunetta, on Thursday compared the three-time prime minister’s impending restrictions to those faced by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Peace Prize-winning human rights activist who was held under house arrest for 15 years in Myanmar. Like her, Mr. Berlusconi “is a symbol,” Mr. Brunetta said on a television program. “When you try and shut them up and block them, they become even stronger.”Mr. Berlusconi has repeatedly dismissed the numerous legal tangles in which he has been implicated. He is currently appealing a seven-year prison sentence for having sex with an under-age woman and abusing his official powers, and he also faces charges of bribing a senator in 2006 to join his party and topple the center-left government in power at the time. He says the cases against him have been politically motivated.Over the years, Mr. Berlusconi has openly tussled with Italian magistrates, and this week he reiterated on his Facebook page that his left-wing political opponents were trying to muzzle him, “availing themselves of their judicial arm,” he wrote.The court will decide how much leeway Mr. Berlusconi will have in his movements — for example, whether he can travel outside of Lombardy, the region where he has his principal residence.He is already barred from traveling outside the country, and in November, Italy’s Senate stripped him of his parliamentary seat. Last month, the country’s highest appeals court upheld his two-year ban from holding public office.“Obviously, it is a delicate moment,” said a political commentator, Mario Sechi. “That’s the case whenever the question of Berlusconi and justice arises.”But Mr. Sechi said he was certain that Mr. Berlusconi would continue to be a major political player, regardless of the outcome of the sentencing. “He will conserve a role politically, because he has forged his place within his electoral base. And if he gets community service, it will be good for him because he can use it as an occasion for communication,” Mr. Sechi said in a telephone interview. “Berlusconi personifies communication.”