INTERNATIONALAn article last Sunday about the anxiety among the Jewish population of the Golan Heights as violence from the civil war in neighboring Syria threatens to spill over the border referred incorrectly to the 22,000 members of the Druze sect in the Golan Heights, which Israel seized in 1967. Although most do shun Israeli citizenship, it is not the case that they generally volunteer for the Israeli military. (The Druze who live in Israel’s pre-1967 territory are Israeli citizens, and the men are subject to the draft.)•An article last Sunday about the frustrations of Hong Kong police officers after they came under criticism during recent pro-democracy protests referred incorrectly to the force. The police are usually armed, except in some crowd control situations; it is not the case that they are usually unarmed.NATIONALAn article  last Sunday about chaos in schools in Washington State as a result of disagreements over education policy misstated the status of Lakeridge Elementary School under the No Child Left Behind law. While the school is in need of “corrective action” and must set aside a portion of federal funding for tutoring and student transfers, it is not failing. (Lakeridge is operating under a “safe harbor” provision of the law that allows underperforming schools to avoid the failing label if they have shown significant improvement.)METROPOLITANThe Sunday Routine feature in some editions last Sunday about Erika Lewis, an organizer of pop-up parties, misidentified the state in which her parents live. Their home is in Southport, N.C. — not in South Carolina.SPORTSAn article last Sunday about a Canadian school district that is teaching a detailed course on concussions and other traumatic brain injuries to ninth graders misspelled the given name of the director of research for the youth sports safety organization MomsTeam. She is Lindsey Barton Straus, not Lindsay.ARTSAn article last Sunday about the Showtime spy thriller “Homeland” misstated the given name of the actress who plays Dana Brody on the show. She is Morgan Saylor, not Megan.•A headline last Sunday about the stage adaptation of the James Dickey novel “Deliverance” by the Godlight Theater Company referred incorrectly to the size of the stage the play is being performed on. As the article correctly noted, it is a 12-by-12-foot stage, not “12 square feet.”•An article last Sunday about the actor Miles Teller, who stars in Damien Chazelle’s new movie, “Whiplash,” misstated part of the name of the jam-band festival that Mr. Teller was traveling to in 2007 when the car he was in flipped over. He was going to the Gathering of the Vibes, not Gathering of the Tribes.BOOK REVIEWAn entry on the combined print and e-book best-seller list on March 30 misstated the year that the English version of Paulo Coelho’s “The Alchemist” was published. It was 1993, not 2003. The error was repeated on the same list on Sept. 28 and last Sunday.•A brief report in the Crime column on Sept. 28 about “Prison Noir,” a story anthology edited by Joyce Carol Oates , referred incorrectly to Oates’s history of teaching in prison educational programs. While she taught several writing workshops at San Quentin in the spring of 2011, she has not been “long active in prison writing programs.”STYLEAn article on Sept. 21 about Amy Cuddy, a social psychologist who says that certain body postures project and instill confidence, misstated a prognosis she was given by doctors after a car accident at age 19. They said that she might struggle to regain full mental capacity and finish college, not that she would never walk again.•An article last Sunday about Alan Cumming omitted a director for the revival of “Cabaret” in which he now appears. Besides Sam Mendes, Rob Marshall is also directing.REAL ESTATEThe  Exclusive column last Sunday, about the listing for sale of the Queen Sofía Spanish Institute on Park Avenue for $48 million, misstated the surname of the president of the institute. She is Inmaculada de Habsburgo, not de Hapsburgo.•An entry with the “On the Market” feature last Sunday about a three-bedroom property in Stamford misstated its price. It was listed at $1,195,000, not $1,347,750.•An article last Sunday about new development in Gowanus, using information provided by Halstead Property, misstated the prices at which new townhouses at 330 and 332 Bond Street are under contract. The houses are under contract at or slightly below their $2.89 million asking prices, not above the asking prices.•The Hunt column last Sunday, about the search for a house in the suburbs of New York City by Dr. Madeleine Fersh and Dr. Jeff Ciccone, misstated the number of bedrooms in the home they bought in Manhasset, N.Y. It has four bedrooms, not two.TRAVELThe answer in the Q&A column on Sept. 28 about wildlife in Madagascar misstated part of the name of an animal there. It is the ring-tailed lemur, not the ring-toed lemur.•The cover story on Sept. 28 about the Frugal Traveler taking a three-leg trip in the Northwest using itineraries of others misstated part of the name of a park in the San Juan Islands. It is Shark Reef Park, not Shark Creek Park.BUSINESSAn article last Sunday about LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the luxury goods conglomerate, misidentified the men’s wear brand where Antoine Arnault, son of LVMH’s chairman, became chief executive in 2010. It is Berluti, not Brioni.MAGAZINEBecause of an editing error, the Eat column on Sept. 17, about a beef stew popular in Cuba, misstated the date of the Cuban revolution. It was 1959, not 1953.•An article on Sept. 21 about Gary Hart and the scandal that derailed his run for the presidency in 1987 misidentified the military branch in which the former senator Bob Kerrey — another public figure touched by scandal — served when, in 1969, he participated in an operation in Vietnam that resulted in the deaths of civilians. He was a member of the Navy SEALs, not a soldier in the Army.•An article on Sept. 28 about Lanai, an island owned by Larry Ellison, misidentified the source of a complaint by a senior vice president of Pulama Lanai, the management company set up to oversee the island’s transformation. She was complaining about a former planning commissioner, not a current one. The article also misspelled part of the name of a tennis tournament that is owned by Ellison. It is the BNP Paribas Open, not BPN Paribas.The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.