WUKAN, China — After staging a very public revolt against official corruption and then voting in remarkably unfettered democratic elections, the people who live in this southern Chinese village returned to the polls on Monday amid torrential rains and growing fears that the Communist Party was taking back control of their local government.In December 2011, villagers in Wukan, a fishing hamlet of 15,000 in Guangdong Province, took to the streets in large protests, chased out local party officials they accused of illegal real estate deals and engaged in an 11-day standoff with armed security forces. After drawing the attention of the international news media, the confrontation ended peacefully when senior Communist Party officials from the provincial capital agreed to allow free elections and promised to investigate the land deals at the heart of the protests.In March 2012, residents voted into office a number of the protest leaders, raising hopes, however faint, that the so-called Wukan model of grass-roots democratic participation might be the start of a political overhaul in a nation governed by single-party authoritarian rule.Yet as they arrived on Monday at a heavily guarded schoolyard to begin the process of electing a new seven-member village committee, many voters said they had come to view their earlier electoral success as the beginning of the end of local self-governance.“There’s a lot less enthusiasm this time around,” said Wang Jinzhen, 62, after she stuffed her paper ballot into a locked metal box. “We still haven’t gotten our land back. The municipal and township governments are corrupt, and they don’t want to help us solve this problem.”Such widespread disenchantment was heightened by the Communist Party’s recent moves to undo Wukan’s hard-won political independence. Early last month, villagers said, higher-level authorities in Donghai township, which includes Wukan, appointed a formerly ousted official to be the next deputy secretary of the Wukan party committee, and he will be joined by four of his former colleagues.Villagers were particularly outraged by the arrests on bribery charges of two protest leaders they elected in 2012, Yang Semao and Hong Ruichao, just weeks before Monday’s election. Mr. Yang was later released on bail, though Mr. Hong remains in custody. Another protest leader fled to the United States this year and is seeking political asylum based on claims that he, too, will become a target of the authorities for challenging their rule.The Chinese government introduced local village elections in the 1980s, but party officials often decide who runs or rig the results to maintain power. Analysts said the shortcomings of Wukan’s independently elected leaders, hamstrung by higher authorities or perhaps because of their own failings, had exposed the limitations of village-level democracy in China and the risks of trying to push those boundaries.“The government just does whatever it wants, and if you say anything they arrest you,” said Cai Keizhou, 35, a driver who participated in the 2011 protests. “It’s like an adult beating a child.”Holding a crimson umbrella beneath a propaganda banner that read “civilized election; fair competition,” Mr. Yang, 47, who was hoping to be elected village chief, had a simple explanation for his detention, “We’re not collaborators.”As for the corruption charges, Mr. Yang has acknowledged accepting 20,000 renminbi, or about $3,200, in bribes but said he immediately donated half to a local school and returned the remaining amount. He would not say who gave him the money. Although the authorities first questioned Mr. Yang and Mr. Hong about the bribery accusations last May, they only decided to detain them two weeks ago, raising suspicions that their detentions were aimed at preventing them from running again.A bigger concern among voters, however, was the lack of resolution over the land deals that prompted the initial protests. The land, more than 1,000 acres of farmland jointly owned by the villagers, had been sold to developers by the former party secretary, Xue Chang, who held the post for more than three decades before he was ousted during the rebellion. He was later convicted on corruption charges. Despite a promised investigation by the provincial government, only a small portion of the land, some of which contains a pig farm, a hotel and other properties, has been returned.Frustrated by the lack of progress, about 400 villagers returned to the streets in protest last April. Only after the village chief, Lin Zuluan, sat down to negotiate with officials in Lufeng city, which oversees Wukan, did people return to their homes. But Mr. Lin, a former protest leader, has become a target of popular frustration, with some villagers saying he has become too close to the authorities he once challenged. “I used to idolize Lin but no longer,” said Hong Ruiqin, 37, a hairdresser whose brother remains in police detention on bribery charges.On Monday night, local authorities announced that Mr. Lin had been re-elected with more than 5,000 of more than 8,000 votes. Voting will resume on Tuesday to elect two deputy chiefs and four committee members. “The election in 2012 was voted on emotions and feelings,” Mr. Lin told journalists in his living room after his victory. “Now it’s much more mature. We have a clearer understanding of democracy.”Land disputes are a major cause of unrest in China. About 90,000 protests or other expressions of civil unrest occur across the country each year, two-thirds of them related to land appropriated by local authorities who then resell the property to commercial developers with little or no compensation provided to the former occupants, according to a 2011 survey by the Landesa Rural Development Institute of Seattle, Renmin University in Beijing and Michigan State University.In Wukan, many villagers expected that their political victory two years ago would end the need for street protests over land. Li Fan, an elections expert who runs the World and China Institute in Beijing, said they sorely misread China’s political reality. “Even though the elected village committee in Wukan represented the people’s interests, it still didn’t have any power to deal with higher-level governments or big state-owned enterprises that have strong political connections,” he said. “Wukan’s last election was very successful, but it solved nothing. Even if it’s a success this time around, it won’t solve anything either.”Yet villagers unhappy with the performance of their elected leadership turned out in droves to support it anyway. According to the authorities, voter turnout on Monday was above 90 percent. “If you don’t vote at all, the municipal government will just install the old corrupt officials,” said Hong Xiaozhuang, 19, a high school student. “But if you vote there’s still a silver lining of hope.”