Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Ebola’s reach.The leaders of three West African nations are in Washington today, meeting with international officials to discuss the virus outbreak and what they need to fight it.Temperature checks of travelers from West Africa go into effect on Saturday at Kennedy International Airport, which receives about 43 percent of the people who fly to the U.S. from Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea.• Battle for the border.Fighters with the Islamic State group are continuing their push today for Kobani, a strategic Syrian town. Capturing the town would give the militants full control of a long stretch of the border with Turkey.U.S. and NATO officials are in Turkey today for talks on that nation’s role in fighting the extremists. There are frustrations that it has not done enough.• Palestinians look ahead.The unity government holds its first cabinet meeting in Gaza today, ahead of a donors conference in Egypt this weekend.Officials are seeking $4 billion to rebuild the territory, which was battered by the war with Israel this summer.• Nobel Prize in Literature.Patrick Modiano of France, who writes on topics like memory, identity and guilt, was today awarded the 2014 Nobel Prize in Literature, which comes with $1.1 million.The literature prize is given out for a lifetime of writing rather for than a single work.• Split in Hong Kong.The government canceled talks with students, which had been set for Friday, after a pro-democracy coalition of lawmakers, students and civic groups vowed today to continue sit-in protests.• “It’s like Michael Brown all over again.”That’s the cousin of a man who was fatally shot by an off-duty St. Louis city police officer on Wednesday. She says he was carrying a sandwich, while officials say he was armed.The officer is white, and the man was black. A crowd of protesters gathered at the scene, just miles away from Ferguson, Mo.• Campaign mode.President Obama leaves the White House today for a two-day West Coast fund-raising trip. The actress Gwyneth Paltrow is hosting the dinner and reception for the Democratic National Committee at her home.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks  are down almost 2 percent after Wednesday’s nearly 2 percent rise. European shares closed mostly lower, and Asian indexes ended widely mixed.• Time Warner Cable shareholders today approved the plan to merge with Comcast, the nation’s largest cable company, a day after Comcast investors signed off on the $45 billion deal.The merger still faces federal antitrust scrutiny and public hostility.• Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, meets with the prime minister of India, the company’s second-biggest market.Mr. Zuckerberg is there for the first conference of Internet.org, which was set up to encourage online access by smartphone in developing countries.• Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, updates Americans on Europe’s economic woes in an address in Washington today.NOTEWORTHY• Country is king.Blake Shelton’s latest album, “Bringing Back the Sunshine,” arrives at No. 1 this week on Billboard’s latest album chart.And the country-pop group Lady Antebellum is No. 2 with “747.” It’s the first time that country albums have held the top two spots on the chart in almost four years.• Taking over Gotham City.More than 130,000 people — many in costume — are expected for New York Comic Con, starting today, to soak up everything from “Game of Thrones” to Minecraft to “The Karate Kid.”The U.S. Postal Service celebrates Batman’s 75th anniversary with limited-edition stamps on the convention’s opening day.• Honoring John Lennon.Yoko Ono lights the Imagine Peace Tower in Reykjavik, Iceland. It’s a monument to her husband, John Lennon, who would have been 74 today. The tower will stay lit until Dec. 8, the day he died in 1980.• Now comes smartjewelry.Fashion designers join hardware companies to one-up the smartwatch with chip-encrusted rings, cuff links and pendants.BACK STORYA few hours before he was assassinated in 1865, President Abraham Lincoln signed into law the legislation that created the Secret Service. It was established to track counterfeiters for the Treasury Department.The agency moved into presidential protection only after another assassination: William McKinley in 1901.While the Secret Service is in hot water today over a breach of White House security, its harshest criticism came 50 years ago.That’s when its director, James J. Rowley, testified before the Warren Commission investigating President John F. Kennedy’s assassination. He is the only Secret Service chief to have a president killed on his watch.Several agents in the presidential motorcade in Dallas had broken agency rules by drinking into the early hours of Nov. 22, 1963. The Secret Service had tried to cover it up.Mr. Rowley withstood withering questioning, including about whether the agents could have prevented the shooting.In the end, the commission concluded: “It is conceivable that those men who had little sleep, and who had consumed alcoholic beverages, even in limited quantities, might have been more alert.”Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Email us at briefing@nytimes.com.