Before the 15th New York National Guard Regiment was formed, black Americans who wanted to enlist against the Germans in World War I had to join the French or Canadian Army. By the end of the war, this all-black regiment was famous on both sides of the Atlantic for never losing an inch of ground to the enemy, or a single man to capture.Jeffrey T. Sammons of New York University and John H. Morrow Jr. of the University of Georgia recall the unit, also known as the Hellfighters and the Men of Bronze, in “Harlem’s Rattlers and the Great War: The Undaunted 369th Regiment and the African American Quest for Equality” (University Press of Kansas), from its formation to the death in 1991 of Hamilton Fish III, a former congressman and its last surviving officer, black or white.Subjected to intense racial discrimination at home, the regiment fared much better once it was attached to the French Army.When a French lieutenant warned Sgt. Henry Johnson, a former Albany railroad porter, to withdraw in the face of a possible enemy attack, he famously declared, “I’m an American, and I never retreat.”The regiment’s courage, which the authors describe as “yet more justification for black people’s claim to martial valor as a prerequisite to full and unqualified citizenship,” was rarely lauded and the soldiers were only begrudgingly included in the 1919 Victory Parade in New York. “These men did not fight the war to make the world safe for democracy,” the authors write. “Instead, they fought to convince America to live up to its democratic promise.”◆ ◆ ◆“Their trade is their god,” the victorious English said of the New Amsterdam Dutch in the 17th century. Fully 230 years after Alexander Hamilton founded the Bank of New York, Steven H. Jaffe and Jessica Lautin write, “Though New York has multiple identities — the city of immigrants, the nation’s cultural and entertainment center — it has arguably been a capital of finance for the longest, with Wall Street its reigning symbol.”In “Capital of Capital: Money, Banking + Power in New York City, 1784-2012” (Columbia University Press), published in conjunction with an exhibition at the Museum of the City of New York, the authors trace the trajectory of high finance in the city, the effect of regulation from Albany and Washington and the influence banks have wielded over vulnerable social groups, like immigrants, poor people in redlined neighborhoods deprived of mortgage financing, and single women and widows denied credit.◆ ◆ ◆Within a year, Huguette Clark, who died in 2011, has inspired two books, which is not two too many, considering the spectacular story of the protagonist who secluded herself in a Manhattan hospital room for two decades after abandoning her far-flung manses.The titles speak for themselves: “Empty Mansions” was published last year; now comes “The Phantom of Fifth Avenue: The Mysterious Life and Scandalous Death of Heiress Huguette Clark” (Grand Central Publishing). Meryl Gordon’s acknowledgments suggest unusual access to some of the people who maintained a relationship with Ms. Clark, a reclusive copper heiress, and who participated in the fight over her $300 million fortune.Still unanswered, but worth Ms. Gordon’s penetrating prose: Why did Huguette Clark became a recluse?