For many political candidates, the days before an election are a period of pandemonium. For Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, they are a prime time to remain out of sight.On Thursday, just five days before the Democratic primary, the governor held no public events. In his absence, his top challenger, Zephyr Teachout, faced off in a debate on public radio against an unusual stand-in: Rob Astorino, the Republican who hopes to beat the governor in the general election in November.At the same time, Mr. Cuomo’s allies became more vocal, attacking Ms. Teachout on multiple fronts. His campaign also unveiled a new television commercial trumpeting his record and defending the Democratic credentials of his pick for lieutenant governor, Kathy Hochul.Mr. Cuomo has refused to debate Ms. Teachout, despite her repeated requests; his supporters say it would be political negligence to spar with Ms. Teachout, a law professor who is not widely known, because the governor is expected to win by a large margin.Little was known about Mr. Cuomo’s activities on Thursday beyond his general location: somewhere in New York City. His office issued news releases about a new program to help schools install solar panels, the opening of an archival center at a historic cemetery and a rise in attendance at state parks and campgrounds.Mr. Cuomo’s office also released a statement after the death of the comedian Joan Rivers, in which the governor called her “an iconic New Yorker” and expressed his condolences.The debate, moderated by Brian Lehrer of WNYC, was unconventional: Ms. Teachout and Mr. Astorino were more eager to criticize Mr. Cuomo than to wrestle with each other.“You’re listening to two people who disagree but are principled,” Mr. Astorino, the Westchester County executive, said. “Andrew Cuomo stands for nothing.”Ms. Teachout described Mr. Cuomo as “much more of a Republican than a Democrat” on economic development. Mr. Astorino said the governor had “failed miserably” at turning around the state’s fortunes and described his administration as “a fraud and a fairy tale.”Both candidates criticized Mr. Cuomo over his dealings with the Moreland Commission, the anticorruption panel shuttered by the governor, a matter that is now being investigated by federal prosecutors. Mr. Lehrer asked them if they considered Mr. Cuomo to be “corrupt,” and both said yes.They also lampooned Mr. Cuomo for his recent comment that debates could be “a disservice to democracy”; Mr. Astorino called the remark “despicable,” and Ms. Teachout deemed it “disrespectful to the voters.”Sometimes, Mr. Cuomo’s name seemed like a bad word.“In the last answer, I felt like Andrew Cuomo was here,” Ms. Teachout said after Mr. Astorino laid out his ideas to improve the state’s economy, which she summarized as a “traditional, conservative, trickle-down Reagan approach towards economic development.”“I’m nothing like Andrew Cuomo,” Mr. Astorino replied.Ms. Teachout predicted “a historic upset” on Tuesday. Mr. Astorino said he was not sure how Ms. Teachout would fare, but offered anecdotal evidence in her favor.“I’ve met about five people so far in nine months, traveling all 62 counties, who have said, ‘I really like Andrew Cuomo,’ ” he said.In a rare acknowledgment that Mr. Cuomo is facing a primary challenge, several of his supporters went on the attack against Ms. Teachout, arguing that her participation in the debate served to bring coveted attention to Mr. Astorino.In a statement, former Gov. David A. Paterson, the chairman of the state Democratic Party, criticized her for “providing a platform for Rob Astorino to promote his extreme conservative agenda.”A spokeswoman for Mr. Astorino, Jessica Proud, said of the criticism, “This is what a Cuomo freakout looks like.” Ms. Teachout, in a telephone interview, said it “doesn’t make any sense.”“Andrew Cuomo, despite himself being in hiding, is clearly focused on this race,” she said. “He seems to be twisting arms to get as many different people as possible to be surrogates, and I don’t think he should be hiding behind his surrogates.”Later, Sheldon Silver, the State Assembly speaker, led a group of lawmakers gathered outside City Hall to raise an unusual issue for a state election: They chastised Ms. Teachout and her running mate, Tim Wu, for what they called insufficient support of Israel. “Their failure to stand strong with Israel speaks volumes,” Mr. Silver said, arguing that issues related to the country were crucial for a New York governor.Mr. Cuomo traveled to Israel last month on what he called a solidarity mission. Ms. Teachout has declined to express a view of the conflict in Gaza. On Tuesday, after Mr. Cuomo held an event highlighting his Israel trip, Ms. Teachout said New York had a “very special relationship” with Israel, a bond that she pledged to support as governor.“But I’m not running for president,” she added, “and I’m not going to second-guess the president or the secretary of state on foreign policy issues.”