BERLIN — Chancellor Angela Merkel welcomed Prime Minister Li Keqiang of China here with full military honors on Friday before the two leaders and their ministers announced more than 2 billion euro, or $2.5 billion, worth of cooperation and investment deals involving Volkswagen, Daimler and some of Germany’s other leading companies.The deals sprang from the third bilateral encounter between leaders of Germany and China since the countries forged a government-level exchange program in 2011.Another big beneficiary was the European aircraft maker Airbus, in which the German government holds a stake, which signed a deal to sell 70 A320 single-aisle jets to China’s state purchasing agency.In all, the German and Chinese leaders signed a 52-page document detailing areas of cooperation that included pushing for the rapid conclusion to talks between the European Union and China on an investment pact, and a raft of projects aimed at fostering innovation in the health, education, climate, energy and technology sectors.Ms. Merkel praised the day’s meetings and deals as an “indication of marked cooperation” between the two countries. The arrangements over the last three years have contributed to steady growth in bilateral trade, with 6.1 percent of German exports heading to China in 2013, compared with 1.6 percent in 2000. Trade between the two countries amounted to €140 billion in 2013.Recent figures, however, point to a cooling of the German economy. According to official data released on Thursday, German exports overall slumped 5.8 percent in August compared with July, the sharpest drop since 2009; they were driven down by unease linked to the conflict in Ukraine and tensions with Russia, as well as decreasing demand for German goods.In fact, European stocks fell on Friday, with Germany’s leading share index, the DAX, down 2.4 percent amid fears of an economic slowdown in Europe and Asia. The Euro Stoxx 50 index, which tracks eurozone blue-chip shares, fell about 1.7 percent.Mr. Li forecast that his country would see growth of about 7.5 percent this year, despite the turbulence, adding that the Chinese economy had “a lot of room for maneuver.”Germany has enjoyed a special relationship to China, given its relatively uncomplicated history with the Asian country. Yet some analysts question how long the honeymoon phase between Berlin and Beijing can last. Points of contention in the business sector have begun to emerge as the Chinese authorities have accused major foreign firms of unfair practices.Last month China fined the German carmaker Audi, owned by Volkswagen, $40.5 million for violating antitrust laws. It was only one in a series of tough measures by China against what it considers monopolistic practices by multinational companies.That made it all the more notable that Volkswagen agreed on Friday to extend its joint venture with China’s FAW Group by 25 years, pledging to invest 100 million euros in the Xinjiang region. VW has been present in China since the 1980s and currently operates eight facilities that produce cars and nine that make components.Ms. Merkel described Friday’s meeting with Mr. Li as “open and intense,” but noted that she had brought up the issues of fair markets, rule of law and human rights.Sebastian Heilmann, director of the Mercator Institute for China Studies in Berlin, cautioned that the relationship between Germany and China “has the potential to be shaken by open conflict.”He noted that the two also faced growing competition with each other in several critical sectors that could further strain ties.“There will be increased future competition in areas where the Germans are strong suppliers, such as mechanical tools, industrial parts and heating technology,” Mr. Heilmann said. “The Germans are climbing the ladder, and the Chinese are climbing right behind them.”Ms. Merkel’s insistence that human rights and economic interests must go hand in hand also has potential to strain the ties. In her most recent weekly podcast, she criticized China for sentencing Ilham Tohti, a Uighur intellectual, to life in prison. On Friday she emphasized the importance of pro-democracy protesters’ right to free speech in Hong Kong and expressed the hope that “a solution can be found through the free exchange of ideas that will satisfy the people of Hong Kong.”On Thursday, government leaders in Hong Kong called off planned talks with students, after protesters vowed to continue their sit-ins.Mr. Li said there had been no change to China’s policy of allowing Hong Kong to be governed by a different system than that of mainland China, but he would not be drawn into answering a question about China’s plans to have nominees for the post of top official vetted by a committee loyal to Beijing.“Maintaining Hong Kong’s long-term stability and prosperity is not only in China’s interest, but all the more in the interest of the city’s inhabitants,” Mr. Li said. He pledged to “protect the legitimate interests of all foreign investors” in Hong Kong.After a business meeting in the northern port city of Hamburg over the weekend, Mr. Li will travel to Russia, where he is to meet President Vladimir V. Putin, before continuing to Milan to attend a meeting of Asian and European leaders on Oct. 16 and 17.Experts expect Germany to seek to persuade Mr. Li to use his influence with Mr. Putin to move toward a resolution of the simmering crisis in Ukraine. “The Germans are hoping the Chinese can have a moderating influence over Russia,” Mr. Heilmann said.