THE MEN OF WELLESLEYAt Wellesley, we are approaching the topics of gender fluidity and transgender experience in our thorough and inclusive way, by discussing it with our students, faculty, alums and trustees; being current with the literature; and hearing from experts in a variety of fields. At the end of our process, we will have identified the key issues, policies and procedures that must be addressed in order to best achieve Wellesley’s mission as a women’s college and to best support our students. The work is going to take some time, but I am certain of this: Wellesley will emerge stronger than ever and will continue to do what it has done so well for so long — invest in women and send them out into the world equipped with the knowledge and confidence to express their views and argue for their convictions. H. KIM BOTTOMLY, president of Wellesley College, Wellesley, Mass.I am excited that we live in an age when being transgender doesn’t necessarily mean you will get your teeth kicked in. But most of the world is comfortable with there being a distinct difference between men and women. Wellesley was meant to provide a space for women to thrive in a male-dominated world. I support my trans brothers, but I personally feel that it is intrusive for trans men to occupy this type of female-only space. Am I anti-trans? No. But I believe it’s important to respect the boundaries that institutions like Wellesley have in place. DANIELLE SPINELLI, New Jersey, posted on nytimes.comIt’s obtuse to suggest that a trans person who identifies as male is thereby conferred all the privilege and baggage that goes along with being male in modern society. Trans people are at the bleeding edge of diversity, and as such it’s hard to imagine people more qualified to be considered representatives of diversity. MATTHEWW, posted on nytimes.comI believe it is contradictory for a trans man to choose a women’s college and then complain about exclusion. Would a white person choosing to attend a predominantly black university or an atheist going to a Bible college get much sympathy for feeling left out? If trans men don’t want to hear about sisterhood, there are thousands of coed institutions they can attend. LAURA KLEIN, Berkeley, Calif., posted on nytimes.comTHE POLITICAL POWER OF BILLIONAIRE OLIGARCHSHow is it that in the “world’s greatest democracy,” a collection of individuals have enough money to sway the leanings of the body politic? No millionaire — left, right, red, blue or purple — should be able to donate their money to unscrupulously influence elections and the politicians who win those elections. There needs to be an overhaul of our campaign-finance system. Elections should be decided by the public, not the whims of a few wealthy citizens. EVERIC WHITE, New York, posted on nytimes.comEven if the candidates are simply puppets and their backers are influential billionaires with unlimited budgets, how would that get a Democrat to vote for a Republican and vice versa? I don’t vote for the candidate with the most TV commercials, I vote for party principles. Restoring sea grass may be a great idea, and if somebody wants to spend $50 billion on it, go ahead. But you won’t get anyone elected on marginalia with wars going on. SALVATORE D’AGOSTINO, Hoboken, N.J., posted on nytimes.comBEGGARS OF LAKEWOODThe beauty of begging is that it allows for the transubstantiation of a mere thing into a gift. The giver has the opportunity to be more enriched in the exchange and to transform the material “thingness” of the object into something worth more than the sum of its parts. Thank you, Mark Oppenheimer, for the chance to peek into a world that both mocks money and throws it into the winds. DAVID HEDGES, New York, posted on nytimes.com