Campaign signs were plentiful, and so was praise for his stewardship of state government. Handshakes with voters were evident, but still scarce. And the entire endeavor was over in just a few hours.Three days before the Democratic primary on Tuesday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo lurched into re-election mode on Saturday with a pair of campaign stops in Manhattan and Queens.It was his first political outing of the campaign season, and a modest one at that. But it also offered a preview of how Mr. Cuomo, who is seeking a second term, plans to frame his case for re-election as the general election in November approaches.“We’ve done a lot, but we have a lot more to do,” Mr. Cuomo said at a rally at a shopping mall in Flushing, Queens, where he endorsed a local state senator.First, however, Mr. Cuomo faces what his supporters view as a supreme annoyance: a primary challenge from Zephyr Teachout, a law professor who has run a left-leaning campaign meant to attract Democrats dissatisfied with Mr. Cuomo’s more centrist approach to governing.Ms. Teachout has won some attention for her bid, appearing on MSNBC on Saturday to discuss her candidacy. The governor had avoided campaigning, unwilling to draw attention to his opponent.But with the primary nearing, Mr. Cuomo stepped forward. His first stop was the Labor Day Parade, in which union members marched up Fifth Avenue.Upon his arrival, Mr. Cuomo gave a kiss on the cheek to his running mate, Kathy Hochul, who will be opposed on Tuesday by Ms. Teachout’s running mate, Tim Wu, a law professor. Neither candidate for lieutenant governor is a household name; Ms. Hochul, a former congresswoman from Buffalo, even wore a plastic name tag.At the start of the parade, Ms. Teachout and Mr. Wu spotted their opponents, who have refused to debate them.Mr. Cuomo’s campaign manager, Joseph Percoco, took on the role of a human wall, repositioning himself to keep Ms. Teachout away from the governor. Mr. Cuomo acted as if Ms. Teachout were not there, and asked about Mayor Bill de Blasio, who soon joined their marching contingent. “Where’s the mayor when you need him?” Mr. Cuomo asked.Mr. Percoco also exchanged words with Mr. Wu, accusing Mr. Wu of shoving him. “I would like to meet our governor,” Mr. Wu replied. (Mr. Wu later said he did not push Mr. Percoco, and added of the effort to shield the governor, “It’s a physical manifestation of the fact that their campaign is fundamentally about brute force politics, rather than ideas.”)Ms. Teachout’s bid has brought forth all manner of liberal criticism of Mr. Cuomo; indeed, the economist Jeffrey D. Sachs, who on Saturday endorsed the Teachout-Wu ticket, said he would not vote for Mr. Cuomo again, even though he had done so in 2010.“You cannot govern with impunity,” he said. “You cannot trade on your family name and govern from a right-wing position, attacking workers, attacking the poor, attacking teachers, giving tax breaks to the rich.”Nonetheless, the parade provided a reminder of just how much support Mr. Cuomo has from the state’s political and labor establishment. As supporters held “Labor for Cuomo” signs, he greeted union leaders and posed for pictures with fellow Democrats. Mr. Cuomo and Ms. Hochul marched with a number of them, including Mr. de Blasio, behind a pipe-and-drum band.The dawn of Mr. Cuomo’s campaign season did not make him any more outgoing: Keeping to form, he largely stuck to the middle of Fifth Avenue and rarely shook hands with spectators.Mr. Cuomo at times seemed to treat Ms. Hochul as an out-of-town visitor, introducing her to anyone and everyone they came across. As they walked past Trump Tower, Mr. Cuomo introduced her to Michael Mulgrew, the president of the United Federation of Teachers.“Say hello to Kathy Hochul, running for lieutenant governor,” Mr. Cuomo announced when the duo greeted some paradegoers lining the side of the street. “Hi, everybody!” she said.“See, Kathy, we’re nice people here in New York City,” Mr. de Blasio told her a moment later.“I love New York, Mayor,” she replied.After the parade, Mr. Cuomo and Ms. Hochul went to Flushing, where they headlined a rally for State Senator Toby Ann Stavisky, a Democrat who faces a primary challenge from S. J. Jung, a community activist.Addressing the crowd, Mr. Cuomo offered what amounted to a general-election stump speech, denouncing “ultraconservatives in the State Legislature” who have opposed his proposal to strengthen abortion rights. The criticism may foreshadow how he plans to attack his Republican challenger, Rob Astorino, the Westchester County executive, as November approaches.The rally for Ms. Stavisky seemed as much intended to promote Ms. Hochul, allowing her to appeal to an important constituency: about half the residents in Ms. Stavisky’s district are Asian, and Ms. Hochul’s opponent, Mr. Wu, is of Chinese descent.After the rally, Mr. Cuomo defended his absence from the campaign trail.“My basic point to the people of the state is, ‘I’m doing a good job,’ ” he said. “The way I campaign is by doing my job.”He also elaborated on a much-criticized comment he made a few days ago in which he said that some debates between candidates could be “a disservice to democracy.”“That was obviously a joke,” Mr. Cuomo said. “When it was reported, it wasn’t reported as a joke.”