LONDON — Heated and sometimes ill-tempered exchanges in the second of two television debates about whether Britain should leave the 28-nation European Union were judged on Thursday to have favored the United Kingdom Independence Party, further polarizing Britain’s discussion on the matter.Two opinion polls suggested that Nigel Farage — the leader of the populist Independence Party, which wants to quit the bloc and reduce immigration — emerged the clear winner in his debate on Wednesday night against Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg. Mr. Clegg leads the Liberal Democrats, the junior partners in Prime Minister David Cameron’s coalition government.Mr. Cameron has promised a referendum on Britain’s membership in the European Union if he is re-elected next year. The unusual debates between Mr. Clegg and Mr. Farage have thus been treated like political set pieces, even though the leaders of Britain’s two main parties, Conservative and Labour, did not take part in them.The debates have been depicted as a particular gamble for Mr. Clegg, who has found it hard to re-establish voter trust after being forced into uncomfortable compromises with the governing Conservatives.The debate Wednesday was more aggressive in tone than the first, held last week. At one point, Mr. Clegg accused Mr. Farage of indulging in “dangerous fantasy.” Mr. Farage responded by saying that the deputy prime minister was “willfully lying to the British people.”The two party leaders may have generated valuable publicity and rallied their own, very different, supporters ahead of European Parliament elections next month, when the Independence Party is expected to do well. Many Conservatives also worry about losing votes to the Independence Party in next year’s general election.Mr. Farage’s antiestablishment tone Wednesday appeared to have struck a chord, even though he has sat in the European Parliament for 15 years.“I know the people are behind this,” Mr. Farage said. “I would urge people — come and join the people’s army. Let’s topple the establishment who got us into this mess.”Some analysts said Mr. Farage’s confidence underscored his steady advance since the days in 2006 when Mr. Cameron dismissed the Independence Party as “a bunch of fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists.”Tim Bale, professor of politics at Queen Mary College at the University of London, said the debates had previewed arguments that would feature in a referendum on European Union membership, but in an artificial context, without the input of the most prominent political or business leaders. “It’s more a case of two parties breathing the pure air of ideological commitment,” he said.An analysis published before Wednesday’s event by Open Europe, a research institute that favors looser ties with the European Union, said the exchanges, while valuable, “have also highlighted how artificially polarized the wider European Union debate tends to get between two contrasting views: Outside the European Union, Britain will become like North Korea: miserable, impoverished and completely isolated. Or like Hong Kong: fully liberalized and with the world at its feet.”On Wednesday, most of the clashes centered on Europe and immigration, but foreign policy also featured prominently, with Mr. Clegg attacking Mr. Farage for comments he had made in a magazine interview, in which he described the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, as the politician he most admired.Britain’s only referendum on its status in Europe was held in 1975, when around two-thirds of voters endorsed continued membership of the bloc, then known as the Common Market. Mr. Cameron has promised that if he is re-elected, he will renegotiate British membership terms and then put the result to a plebiscite by 2017.David Dimbleby, the BBC journalist who moderated the event Wednesday, hosted a debate on the same issue in 1975. Before Wednesday’s broadcast, he said the topics remained “exactly the same” almost four decades later. “It’s all about democracy, control — constitutional control — on the one hand, and jobs on the other,” he added.While the European Union is a divisive issue in Britain, it generally ranks low on most voters’ lists of concerns, and many mainstream politicians avoid discussing it. In 2006, after taking over the leadership of his party, Mr. Cameron warned colleagues that they had alienated voters by “banging on” about Europe and tax cuts.Professor Bale said the contests between Mr. Clegg and Mr. Farage were unlikely to have much of an effect on voters.Nevertheless, he said, the television duels showed “one of the most popular politicians at the moment debating one of the least popular,” providing “a form of political light entertainment.”