Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Ebola worries grow.President Obama today appointed Ron Klain, a former vice-presidential chief of staff, as “Ebola czar” to coordinate U.S. efforts to combat the deadly virus.The U.N. secretary-general says that a $1 billion trust fund he started last month has received only $100,000.And an employee of a Dallas hospital who may have had contact with specimens of the virus is aboard a cruise ship, the State Department said today.• Face to face.The presidents of Ukraine and Russia discussed the crisis in eastern Ukraine on the sidelines of the Asia-Europe summit meeting in Milan.The leaders of Britain, France, Germany and Italy, also there, pressed Russia to do more to end the fighting, which has killed more than 3,500 people since April.• At the courts.The judge today adjourned until Tuesday the sentencing hearing for the South African track star Oscar Pistorius in the killing of his girlfriend.In the U.S., a Florida man was sentenced today to life in prison for fatally shooting a teenager at a gas station in a 2012 dispute over loud music.• Storm watch.Bermuda is bracing for a direct hit today from Hurricane Gonzalo, a Category 4 storm with winds of 145 miles per hour.And a storm in the Pacific that is predicted to grow to a hurricane is moving toward Hawaii and may hit the state today.• Surprise raid in Hong Kong.Hundreds of police officers removed many of the barricades erected by pro-democracy protesters before dawn today.The city’s leader is expected to hold talks with the protest leaders next week.• The militant threat.President Obama meets with his National Security Council this afternoon, and Gen. Lloyd Austin, the Central Command commander, holds a news conference, his first since the airstrikes against the Islamic State began.A Kurdish commander in the strategic Syrian town of Kobani told the BBC that the extremists have been nearly driven out. But they appeared to be gaining in Iraq.• Pop concert deaths.At least 14 concertgoers died at an outdoor site in South Korea today when a ventilation grill they were standing on collapsed, the police said.• Genocide trial opens.A U.N.-backed tribunal began hearing the case against the leaders of Cambodia’s brutal 1970s Khmer Rouge regime in their second trial today.About 1.7 million people died from starvation, disease and execution under their rule.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks  are up sharply. European indexes gained nearly 3 percent, while Asian shares ended mixed.• Janet L. Yellen, Federal Reserve chairwoman, said in a Boston speech today that chances for Americans to advance economically are shrinking.She did not address the market’s recent volatility or the interest rate outlook.• Apple’s new iPhones went on sale today in China and India.• Shares of Jimmy Choo, the British luxury footwear maker, rose on their first day of public trading in London today.• A bankruptcy judge is to rule today on whether the Trump Taj Mahal casino in Atlantic City can shed its labor pact in order to seal a $100 million rescue deal with the investor Carl Icahn.• General Electric said its net income rose to $3.54 billion in the third quarter. Morgan Stanley’s profit rose more than expected.NOTEWORTHY• Giants will face the Royals.San Francisco advanced to the World Series for the third time in five years Thursday night.A ninth-inning three-run homer by Travis Ishikawa gave the Giants a 6-3 victory over the St. Louis Cardinals in Game 5 of the N.L. Championship Series. Game 1 of the World Series is Tuesday night in Kansas City.• Remember the 1989 World Series?Twenty-five years ago today, San Francisco was struck by a 6.9 magnitude earthquake that killed at least 63 people and left $3 billion in destruction.Many believe fatalities would have been worse if more people had been on the freeways rather than at the World Series game in Candlestick Park.• On the silver screen.Brad Pitt leads a World War II tank crew in “Fury,” opening today, which our film critic A. O. Scott considers a “sensitive and superbly acted tale of male bonding under duress.”Another 15 films arrive in theaters today.• Popular reads.Gillian Flynn’s “Dark Places” spends its first week on our fiction best-seller list, coming in the Sunday Book Review. Her other novel, “Gone Girl,” remains No. 1.And the Harvard linguist Steven Pinker’s “The Sense of Style,” an update on the rules of writing, enters our nonfiction list at No. 7.BACK STORYNow in its 40th season, “Saturday Night Live” has long established itself as a television institution.But last week’s episode scored the series’ lowest-ever ratings among 18- to 49-year-olds.It was a reminder that the “SNL” struggles are as much a part of its story as its successes — something of a routine as cast members come and go.One of the bumpiest times followed the 1980 loss of the original so-called “Not Ready for Primetime Players” and the executive producer Lorne Michaels. (He would return a few years later.)The subsequent season was such a mess that Mr. Michaels’s replacement and much of the cast were fired after only 12 episodes.But if the show’s cycle holds up, new talents, memorable characters and influential one-liners will come around again.People who “lament ‘Saturday Night Live’ is not as good as it once was,” Ryan McGee wrote for A.V. Club, the entertainment website, “tend to selectively remember certain seminal sketches and forget the clunkers that surrounded them.”Rick Rojas contributed reporting.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Email us at briefing@nytimes.com.