If you’re the patriotic sort, this is definitely your weekend to do that most American of things: sit in front of the television. Rousing, flag-waving concerts and other such fare will be readily available on network TV and cable alike.But what if you’re not feeling so warm and fuzzy about dear ol’ Uncle Sam at the moment? What if, say, the government has told you that you can no longer graze your cattle on federal land without paying for the privilege? What if the Internal Revenue Service is hassling you simply because you stash your true-blue American company’s profits offshore to avoid paying true-blue American taxes? Take heart: You can still spend your holiday in front of the TV. With vigilance, you can probably avoid seeing a single flag being waved, though you might see one being eaten.It won’t be easy. There is nothing networks like better than to play to red-meat patriotism. On Friday night, you can watch the Macy’s fireworks on NBC, with Nick Cannon, the “America’s Got Talent” host, as M.C. Or you can watch what PBS describes as “a star-spangled party live from the U.S. Capitol,” with, among others, Frankie Valli and the Muppets.The performers are a bit less, um, vintage at the “Philly 4th of July Jam,” Friday night on VH1. But for real patriotic fervor the place to go may be RFD-TV (its tagline: “Rural America’s Most Important Network”), where the series “Country’s Family Reunion” has put together a special July 4 episode called “God Bless America Again.”If you want to avoid those overt Independence Day celebrations but still watch something that speaks to the very essence of Americanism, try AXS TV. On Friday afternoon, just after it finishes showing “Guns N’ Roses: Appetite for Democracy — Live at the Hard Rock Casino,” it plunges into more than eight hours of programming it’s calling “Fights and Fireworks,” featuring assorted people punching and kicking one another. It’s a marathon of Ultimate Fighting Championship and other slugfest-related shows. Because nothing says “I’m an American” like beating someone senseless.Speaking of senseless, in between a morning marathon of two of its better shows, “Panic Button” (which puts people in amusingly uncomfortable situations) and an evening one of “The Carbonaro Effect” (in which the illusionist Michael Carbonaro punks people), TruTV is killing off much of Friday afternoon with repeats of an amateur-video clip show called “Top 20 Most Shocking.” In it, people film themselves doing stupid things, because that’s what constitutes wit in many circles. Among the episodes showing on Friday: “Dumb Daredevils” and “Dumb Daredevils 2,” although in the interest of taste, we’ve omitted one three-letter word from each of those titles. The clips in these shows many not all be American-made, but the United States is all about freedom, and that includes the freedom to climb a 30-foot pine tree while drunk and then fall out of it.If these daredevil dopes aren’t crazy enough for you, Epix is devoting Independence Day to “American Psychos,” a daylong orgy of movies like “Primal Fear,” “Silence of the Lambs” and “Carrie.” There’s also a “Walking Dead” marathon on AMC and a “Transformers” marathon on the Hub Network. The History channel, meanwhile, offers a choice. Those who want to revel in America on its Independence Day can watch “America: The Story of Us” all day and “American Pickers” all night on the main History channel. But those who want to get far away from all things American can go to the sister channel, H2, for 15 hours’ worth of “Ancient Aliens,” a series that examines extraterrestrial visitations from the distant past.For those who prefer to block out the jingoism of the day with an overload of love and lust, TLC stands ready to help. To fill its holiday-weekend airtime, that channel is leaning heavily on reruns from its “Say Yes to the Dress” franchise, which documents the goings-on in bridal shops. But on Saturday, those bride-to-be repeats will share time with episodes of two other series, “Dates From Hell” and “Sex Sent Me to the E.R.” In 21st-century America, romance is a complicated thing.As for flag-eating, it takes place in “A Taste of Freedom,” a scalding and brilliant episode of the animated series “Futurama” from 2002 that Comedy Central is showing on Friday afternoon. It’s Freedom Day on planet Earth, which in “Futurama” is also home to assorted non-Earthlings, and everyone is celebrating the fact that they’re free to do whatever they want. But are they?Not really, as Dr. Zoidberg, an alien, discovers when he eats a flag in front of a huge crowd on the National Mall in Washington.“Yes, fellow patriots, I ate your flag,” he tells the crowd, “and I did it with pride, for to express oneself by doing a thing is the very essence of Freedom Day!”The crowd does not respond with the roar of approval that he was expecting, and neither does Richard M. Nixon, whose preserved head — yes, his preserved head — calls for Zoidberg’s execution. Over the final 17 minutes of this minimasterpiece, the Supreme Court hears Zoidberg’s case, Earth is invaded and conquered by Zoidberg’s fellow aliens (“Your planet doesn’t deserve freedom until it learns what it is to not have freedom,” Zoidberg says), and everyone has occasion to reflect on the ideas behind patriotic symbols.In the TV cacophony of Independence Day weekend, is this the one half-hour that is perfectly suited both to those who can’t stand to hear any more patriotic songs and to those who can’t get enough of them? Maybe so.