Anatoly Pakhomov was elected mayor of Sochi after the type of ersatz campaign that passes for democracy in Russia. It was 2009, and he had been appointed acting mayor — effectively the local manager of the massive construction project already underway — and in Russia incumbency means victory. His many prospective challengers included a K.G.B. veteran accused of poisoning the fugitive secret-service officer Aleksandr Litvinenko with polonium; a prima ballerina who had become even more famous after the Bolshoi dismissed her for being overweight; and a pornographic actress, Yelena Berkova, who ran a campaign ad that showed her gamboling topless along one of the Black Sea beaches that first made Sochi popular in the early 20th century.Many challengers did not even make it to the ballot, barred for various reasons, real and contrived. Those who did qualify as candidates — most significant, Boris Nemtsov, a Sochi native and former deputy prime minister under Russia’s first president, Boris Yeltsin — never had a chance. Nemtsov and the others faced constant harassment and were denied crucial access to television and radio channels controlled by the state. Pakhomov won 77 percent of the vote, officially at least. Nemtsov sued — and lost — and his contempt lingers. “A real idiot, right?” he told me recently, referring to the man who bested him in an election that amounted to a farce.Pakhomov is a garrulous, barrel-bellied apparatchik of the new Russia, whose biography cites not one but two Ph.D.'s. When I interviewed him in December in his office, the mayoral building was, like most of the city, still enveloped in scaffolding for the final pre-Olympic cosmetic touches. After introductions, he did not wait for a question but launched into a pre-emptive defense of the games, monologuing for 15 minutes before I managed to interject, briefly. “We built 438 transformer substations, 17 power-distribution hubs, two thermoelectric power stations!” he shouted. “We generate 540 megawatts!” The Olympics, he went on, have done nothing less than transform Sochi, a subtropical resort that stretches about 90 miles along a narrow coastline at the foothills of the Caucasus Mountains. Three new water-purification plants; more than 200 miles of new roads; 22 tunnels and 55 bridges to ease the city’s chronically snarled traffic; 13 new and renovated railroad stations; five new schools; six medical centers “with top-of-the-line medical equipment”; 49 new hotels with 24,000 rooms. Pakhomov picked up a laser pointer and turned it to a wall-size map of Sochi, highlighting the sites of the shimmering new Olympic stadiums and arenas, the ski resorts carved out of the mountains above a once-tiny-and-remote village, Krasnaya Polyana, the new airport terminal, the port that will become a yacht marina, the complex of railroad lines and stations that he compared favorably with the Baikal-Amur Mainline, or BAM, the enormous railroad project built across an inhospitable Siberia and Far East in the 1970s and ‘80s by a dying Soviet Union. Not since Stalin favored Sochi as the sunny retreat of the Soviet elite has so much been done to remake the city’s landscape. “It’s incomparable!” Pakhomov bellowed.The Soviet proclivity for superlatives endures. So does the notion that a country’s greatness stems from its ability to execute improbably gigantic projects of dubious economic viability. Soviet history is replete with these megaprojects, top-down endeavors that, in the name of collectivism, industrialized the nation, conquered the Arctic, built the military that crushed the Nazis and stood toe to toe against the United States and NATO. They were ideological as much as economic, intended above all to demonstrate the superiority of the Soviet political system. By the dusk of the Soviet era, they became largely discredited. The last Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, promised to end the megaprojects and embrace more sensible development strategies.The megaproject has returned — another Soviet legacy pursued by the singular will of Vladimir Putin, who seems incapable of escaping the ideas that nurtured him from youth. The Olympics in Sochi are often called Putin’s games, a profligate investment to prove to the world Russia’s resurrection, a personal validation of his 14 years — and counting — as the country’s paramount ruler. They are the realization of Putin’s power and a vital instrument in keeping it. In the nearly seven years since Russia was awarded the games, Putin’s government has spent a sum so staggering — officially, at least $51 billion, though according to some estimates much higher — that Sochi has become the most expensive Olympics ever, far surpassing the $40 billion that China spent on the Summer Olympics in Beijing in 2008.Sochi is simply the most prominent of many megaprojects through which Putin has distributed the nation’s wealth to buy loyalty and to discipline the lack of it. The government spent nearly $7 billion in the Volga River city of Kazan to hold last year’s summer Universiade, the biennial athletic competition of university students that hardly ranks as a major international event, and it has already won the right to hold the winter Universiade in 2019 in the Siberian city of Krasnoyarsk. Russia is building or refurbishing 12 stadiums and upgrading hotels and transportation in 11 cities to hold the FIFA World Cup in 2018 — at an estimated cost that has already doubled to nearly $20 billion since 2010.The megaprojects are not limited to sporting events. Russia spent $20 billion to remake Vladivostok — including a new university complex and a bridge linking the city to an island that was once a closed military zone, largely in preparation for holding a two-day summit meeting in 2012 of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation nations. (When I attended as a reporter traveling with Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, the dorm rooms had been completed so recently that they reeked of glue and fresh paint.) To facilitate natural-resource extraction in the Far North, the Russian government, in collaboration with the energy giant Gazprom, is spending billions to complete an Arctic railway that was a failed megaproject in the Soviet era. Stalin decreed a similar railroad project in 1949, using the slave labor of the gulag to carve the route though the frozen earth. (It was abandoned when he died in 1953, but not before tens of thousands of prisoners perished during the effort.) Putin’s design for the Arctic seems no less grandiose.Putin and his supporters say that these projects are economic-stimulus programs to modernize and expand a sagging economy, but others see a darker underside. In a forthcoming book, “The 2014 Winter Olympics and the Evolution of Putin’s Russia,” two scholars at George Washington University, Robert W. Orttung and Sufian Zhemukhov, argue that what we’re seeing is a return to the national purpose of the Soviet megaprojects, though without an explicit ideology — other than the continuation of Putin’s rule and the enrichment of a new oligarchy. “The games,” they write, “help to promote regime stability by providing a sense of national pride for the masses and a source of rent distribution for key elites whose support is crucial for the leadership to maintain the status quo.”Pakhomov speaks of Putin with reverence, even awe, as though he were a leader so elevated that he has become a distant demigod, which to most Russians is what he is. “From the very beginning until this day,” he told me when I finally managed to interject a question about the origins of the Sochi Olympics, “the president controlled everything. He follows the course of construction. He watches how all the state bodies, the financial organs, spend each ruble.” The project was realized by a team of officials, Pakhomov among them, but only Putin had the vision to make it happen. At another point, he noted that under Putin, Sochi finally had a bypass road to ease the city’s congestion (it just opened). Stalin had proposed one, he said, but under Putin it was built.The only time in nearly an hour that Pakhomov lowered his voice was when I asked him about Putin’s regular oversight of the construction in Sochi, which has been fraught with well-chronicled delays, cost overruns, environmental abuses and, as with Peter the Great’s creation of a czarist St. Petersburg, the squalid treatment of laborers. Putin’s meetings are staged affairs, broadcast slavishly by state television networks to show the man very much in charge. They occasionally become vehicles for him to scold minions who have disappointed. “After the journalists leave,” Putin told his assembled subordinates during a meeting in 2012 on preparations for the Olympics, “I will tell you what failures to meet the deadlines will amount to.” Another public dressing-down last year, involving delays and cost overruns in construction of the ski jump in Krasnaya Polyana, was so terrifying that the project manager, a vice president of the Russian Olympic Committee, promptly fled the country with his brother after being fired. (He later claimed he was poisoned with mercury.) “Personally, I am always very tense and nervous when I’m invited to present a report to the president,” Pakhomov told me, his voice at last a hush. “He sets the tasks, but he never says you did a good job. He always says simply that everything has to be finished.”The single most expensive project of the Sochi Olympics is not the Fisht stadium, which will be the site of the opening and closing ceremonies (and where matches of the 2018 World Cup will be held). It is not the Bolshoi Ice Palace, the hockey arena shaped like a frozen droplet of water (which it is said will become the home of a new franchise in Russia’s expanding Kontinental Hockey League), nor the Iceberg, where figure skating will take place. These are the buildings that hundreds of millions of television viewers will see during the Games, but the cost of building them pales in comparison with the project most will not see: a new highway and railroad connecting the coastal area to the village of Krasnaya Polyana in the mountains 30 miles away. It cost at least $8 billion, more than the entire Vancouver games four years ago.The project was an engineering marvel and, to critics, a boondoggle that has created an environmental calamity. The railroad begins at a new train station (now the largest station in all of Russia) in Adler, a district of Sochi. It then courses up the Mzymta River, which, once pristine, now churns downhill in a muddy brown, washing past construction detritus left behind. The impact was so extensive that the United Nations Environmental Program pressed Russia to adopt a restoration plan, while Unesco has repeatedly questioned the effects of the construction on the Western Caucasus, which it describes, along with a forest in the Urals, as “the only large mountain area in Europe that has not experienced significant human impact.”The project was overseen by Russia Railways, the state-owned company that is the country’s largest employer. Since 2005, it has been led by Vladimir Yakunin, a friend of Putin’s whose posting as a diplomat at the United Nations at the end of the Soviet era fueled speculation — never confirmed or denied — that he, too, worked for the K.G.B. Under Yakunin, the company has become enormously profitable. For the Olympics it also refurbished the railroad from Moscow to Sochi (now a 23-hour ride) and the local lines in Sochi itself. The city now has a network of new trains linking the city center to its airport in Adler, the Olympic Park and the mountains. The ride from Adler to the mountains takes 43 minutes and costs 56 rubles, or about $1.70. In an interview in the railways’ headquarters in Moscow, Yakunin said that the company’s return on its share of the investment — roughly $1.3 billion — would take at least 20 years. Whether the project is economically sound is not the point, though, when the state is the only shareholder, and Putin decides what’s best for it. Yakunin compared the project with the trans-Siberian Railway built under Czar Nicholas II. Commercially, it too was unsustainable, he said, but without it, “we would not have Russia today at all, at least in the borders we have.”“This is one of the biggest frauds of the Olympics,” Boris Nemtsov said about the new road and railway, and the whole Sochi project, he says, is the biggest fraud in Russia’s history, “maybe even the biggest in human history.” Now 54, Nemtsov was once one of the brightest stars of the democracy movement that emerged from the collapse of the Soviet Union. A mathematician and a physicist with a Ph.D. that he defended when he was only 25, he became involved in politics by protesting plans to build a nuclear reactor after the Chernobyl disaster. In 1991, he was appointed governor of Nizhny Novgorod, the formerly closed city of Gorky, and served until 1997, when Boris Yeltsin drafted him to join his government. He was so popular — young, handsome, intelligent — that he was widely discussed as a potential successor for the ailing Yeltsin. Those prospects crashed with the Russian economy in 1998 and, a year later, with the unexpected ascension of Putin. The two occasionally worked together in the beginning, but Nemtsov turned fierce critic after the arrest of the oil tycoon Mikhail Khodorkovsky in 2003. He has since vehemently attacked Putin’s authoritarian instincts and the heavy hand of the security organs and has been arrested three times for taking part in anti-Putin protests.“What is really interesting is that Putin believes nobody knows about the corruption,” Nemtsov said over dinner in Moscow. It’s not for Nemtsov’s lack of trying. In a report he co-wrote and distributes at political protests, he noted that Russian Railways contracted the bulk of the road and railway project to two companies, including one that is now partly owned by a businessman named Gennady Timchenko, who has longstanding connections to Putin. Nemtsov also claims that 15 percent of the entire Olympic budget went to companies owned by the brothers Rotenberg, Arkady and Boris, who were Putin’s friends and judo partners when they were coming of age in the 1960s. After Putin’s rise to power, they advanced in the ranks of Russia’s oligarchs. In an interview with The Financial Times in 2012, Arkady Rotenberg defended his friendship and said he had not used it for personal gain. “I have great respect for this person,” he said of Putin, “and I consider that this is a person sent to our country from God.”Every Olympics costs more than the initial projections, but Russia’s costs have increased more than fourfold since Putin’s initial estimate of $12 billion. As Nemtsov figures, because most games typically double in cost, the difference in Russia — $25 billion to $30 billion — can be attributed to outright thievery. “This is a festival of corruption,” he said. And he argued that everything — from the choice of Sochi, to the design of the buildings, to the contracts parceled out — was effectively controlled by Putin. “There was no public discussion about the place. Zero. Not even one discussion in Parliament. Zero. No discussion on Putin TV, the zombie box. It was completely closed.”In December, a scientist and environmentalist named Yulia Naberezhnaya agreed to meet in Sochi, but only after certain precautions were taken to protect the now-secret location of her organization, the Environmental Watch on the North Caucasus, which has been chronicling the abuses done to a fragile biosphere by the preparations for the Olympics. The alliance’s office in a nearby town was raided by security services in March, as was the home of one of its members, Vladimir Kimayev. Its leader, Andrei Rudomakha, was detained in October along with Naberezhnaya, as they were on their way to the office in Sochi. The police detained Rudomakha for failing to submit for questioning in a slander case dating to 2012. (He had commented that a local judge was pro-government after she gave jail time to a political protester for holding a candlelight vigil.) Rudomakha assumed the case had been dropped, but the summons noted the days he would be in Sochi, leading him to suspect his movements were being tracked. He has since been ordered not to leave the Krasnodar region, where Sochi is located. Two other members were convicted and given three-year suspended sentences for staging a protest against a fence that the region’s governor, Aleksandr Tkachyov, erected in a protected forest surrounding his home. In October, Kimayev was involved in a traffic accident that left him hospitalized. He was riding his scooter home from a meeting with two journalists when the brakes gave out. Kimayev wondered about the young men he saw lingering by the scooter before he left. “We are not a powerful-enough organization to fight the state,” Naberezhnaya told me. “The only thing we can do is raise hell, and then see what happens. And even that is being taken away from us.”Naberezhnaya asked that a colleague and I meet her at a bus stop in Bytkha, a working-class neighborhood that climbs into the hills along the coast and is likely to be trod by few, if any, of the visitors who come for the Olympics. It was already dark when we arrived, and she appeared at the bus stop a few minutes later. She took us on a rambling walk through darkened streets and alleys before we arrived at the back of a Soviet-era apartment building, with an expansive view of Sochi’s center and the mountains cast in silvery moonlight. An old shed had been converted into a crude apartment, sparsely furnished and occupied most of the time by a lone cat. Stacked around were boxes of campaign literature for Yabloko, one of the oldest democratic parties in Russia, to which many of the environmentalists also belong. It is here that Naberezhnaya is finishing work, in virtual collaboration with the alliance’s now-scattered members, on a final report on the environmental impact wrought not only by the Olympics but also by the rapacious development underway in the region’s protected parks, including a supposed research center above Sochi that is widely believed to be a personal mountain resort, replete with helipads and several Swiss-style chalets, for Putin.She cited a new law that was proposed by the Kremlin and dutifully adopted by both houses of Parliament in November 2007, effectively superseding all other relevant laws regarding the use of environmentally sensitive areas. “The territory planning documentation for the location of Olympic facilities shall be approved without holding public hearings,” the law declared.In her dim shed-apartment-office, Naberezhnaya described a sort of golden age of environmentalism after the collapse of the Soviet Union, where activists could openly call for preservation and collaborate with foreign advocates and scientists to protect Russia’s abundant natural wonders. Since Putin, she said, there has been a steady deterioration of rights that has polarized the country into loyalists and enemies. “At the beginning, when we used to handcuff ourselves to the mayor’s building in protest, the police would unhook us gently. Now they pull us by our hair.” She told me of a good friend who worked for the special police, known as OMON, who warned her: “Be careful. One day we’ll be on the opposite sides of the barricades.” Naberezhnaya compared this kind of deadening paranoia to something out of Kafka’s “Castle,” the dark and surreal novel in which the protagonist, K., struggles to engage an opaque, all-powerful authority. She noted that there had been a Russian film version made in 1994, the early days of Russia’s democratic transition. “The film is very atmospheric,” she wrote in an email a few days later. “Watch carefully.”If, as Putin has said, hosting the Olympics is a judgment on Russia, then so far the judgment has been a harsher one than he expected. By the end of 2007, Putin announced that he would step down as president after two terms — though he could have easily initiated a change in the constitution to stay for another term, or for life. True, he anointed a successor, Dmitri Medvedev, and continued to serve as prime minister, remaining the country’s paramount leader, especially when it came to preparations for the Olympics, but he seemed content to manage a transition to a new generation of leadership, his historic mission accomplished.In 2012, however, Putin declared his intention to return to the presidency, and since then has presided over an intensifying crackdown on dissent. He forced through a new law requiring nongovernment organizations that receive funding from abroad to register as “foreign agents,” a term with echoes of Soviet persecution of dissidents. He banned the adoption of orphans by Americans. He signed a new law that made it a crime to propagandize “nontraditional relationships” to minors, prompting international outrage and calls for a boycott of Sochi by gay rights organizations. Many prominent world leaders, including President Obama, have made excuses not to attend the Sochi games, thus avoiding having to appear beside Putin as he basks in the international attention.Human Rights Watch and other groups like the Environmental Watch on the North Caucasus have chronicled a range of abuses, including the gross exploitation of migrant laborers, many of them shuttled in from abroad. While Russian officials dispute the accusations of corruption, the evidence has mounted to the point that even a member of the International Olympic Committee, Gian-Franco Kasper, told Switzerland’s SRF radio this month that roughly a third of the spending on the games had been lost to embezzlement.Many of the stadiums, the Alpine ski courses, the sleek new bobsled track, are ready and have already been tested in international competitions, but construction work has continued up to the last minute, with complaints from organizers that hotels and other amenities might not be ready in time. When I visited the site of the freestyle ski events, the surrounding area was a muddy mess, cluttered with construction equipment and debris. Aleksandr Savilov, the site’s manager, said the progress that had been made was almost unimaginable. “Two years ago, there was almost nothing here,” he told me. “It’s like mushrooms after the rain.” It was late November, and it still had not snowed, the weather in the mountains being so unpredictable that organizers had stockpiled snow from last winter and built the world’s most extensive system for making artificial snow. Looking from a platform over the work still underway at the village where athletes will stay, he shrugged off the delays. “Even if it’s not finished,” Savilov said, “the snow will cover it.”Despite all the criticism, the games in Sochi will take place, and they will most likely be deemed a triumph, a validation of Putin’s leadership, unless of course disaster strikes in the form of terrorism or some other tragedy.In his office overlooking the coast, Dmitri Chernyshenko, the president of the Sochi Olympic Organizing Committee, acknowledged that it was “a very risky decision” for the international committee to choose Sochi, but that Russia had succeeded in using the opportunity to redevelop the only subtropical seashore it has. “We need such a project to unite the nation,” he said.Like Chernyshenko, Pakhomov has little patience for the critics, especially his former challenger. “He must be ashamed,” he said of Nemtsov. “When he was running for mayor, he said, ‘It’s impossible — nothing can be built here.’ Now he can see that everything has been built.” Pakhomov complained to me that Russia remained burdened by old stereotypes, recalling a visiting foreign official asking him, “What else do you have except vodka and bears?” He said Russia was a different place from the Soviet Union when it held the Summer Games in 1980. “Even now the goals are different,” he told me. “We want to be open to the entire world and to show the world our hospitality, our culture, our love of sport, our beauty, the cleanliness of our streets. And of course, we would like to get rid of the drivel that we have endured and is not so pleasant.”