NATIONALAn article  on Monday about the Alliance Defending Freedom, which has emerged as a legal force for the religious right, misspelled, in some editions, the surname of San Francisco’s mayor in 2004, who was forced by the group to stop granting same-sex marriage licenses. He is Gavin Newsom, not Newsome. (Mr. Newsom is now California’s lieutenant governor.)NEW YORKBecause of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about testimony in a legislative inquiry into the closing of access lanes to the George Washington Bridge misidentified the person who defended the work of the New Jersey Office of Intergovernmental Affairs as “good government” and “amazingly nonpartisan.” The comment was by Christina Renna, a former aide to Gov. Chris Christie — not by Bridget Anne Kelly, Mr. Christie’s former deputy chief of staff who was also Ms. Renna’s boss.BUSINESS DAYAn article on Thursday about big American companies’ weighing a move overseas to reduce their tax bills misstated the position of Goldman Sachs Investment Partners about a possible deal through which Walgreen would acquire an overseas competitor and reincorporate abroad. The investment firm refrained from voicing an opinion; it did not encourage such a move.•A picture caption on Monday with an article about Yonder, a music streaming service that will sell specially licensed smartphones that allow users unlimited free downloads, misstated the day the service would begin operating. It will start today; it did not begin operation on Monday.•The Advertising column on Wednesday, about a decision by the Coca-Cola Company to replace its new campaign for Diet Coke after it was widely mocked in social media, misstated the year the soft drink was introduced. It was 1982, not 1983.THE ARTSAn article on Saturday about the Eurovision Song Contest referred incorrectly to the Austrian contestant, Conchita Wurst, the eventual winner. That is the persona adopted by Thomas Neuwirth, who performs in drag. Conchita Wurst is not a transgender singer.•An art review on Monday about “A Subtlety or The Marvelous Sugar Baby,” an installation at the former Domino Sugar factory in Brooklyn by the artist Kara Walker, who is best known for work caricaturing slavery in the antebellum South, misstated a phrase applied to slavery when it was legal in the United States. It is “peculiar institution,” not “curious institution.”•A dance review on Saturday about the choreographer Maud Le Pladec’s “Democracy,” at New York Live Arts in Manhattan, referred incorrectly to the performance. It was the New York debut of the work, not the United States debut.WEEKENDAn art review on Friday about “Robert Rauschenberg: The Fulton Street Studio, 1953-54,” at the Craig F. Starr Gallery in Manhattan, misidentified the river in Italy into which Rauschenberg threw some of his work in 1953 before returning to New York and renting a loft on Fulton Street. It was the Arno River in Florence, not the Tiber in Rome.SPECIAL SECTION:BUSINESS TRAVELA picture caption on Thursday with the On the Road column, comparing the amenities of modern luxury air travel to those of past decades, misidentified the destination of the Panagra DC-6 airliner shown. It was going to South America, not to South Africa.The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper's journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.