ALBANY —  In a rare bipartisan rebuke, the New York State Legislature is resisting Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s plan to effectively freeze property taxes for two years, one of the centerpieces of the budget he proposed in January.New York has some of the highest property taxes in the country. The governor, who is up for re-election in November, has sought to focus attention on the issue, warning that high taxes were crushing homeowners and driving people from New York.“It is the single most oppressive tax in this state,” Mr. Cuomo said on Friday in an address in Manhattan to the Association for a Better New York.The governor’s idea for a tax freeze comes three years after he persuaded lawmakers to pass a property tax cap limiting annual increases to 2 percent or the rate of inflation, whichever is lower.The governor now wants to give rebates to homeowners equal to increases in property taxes for the next two years — a proposal he has said would effectively be a temporary “freeze” on property taxes. (It would not apply to New York City.)He is so eager to promote the proposal that his re-election campaign has already paid for television commercials declaring property taxes “out of control.”Mr. Cuomo’s budget office projects that the two-year tax freeze would cost about $1.9 billion. Households that earn under $500,000 would be eligible, and at its peak, homeowners would receive an average rebate of $350. The first checks would be sent out this fall; at least some would be mailed before Election Day.But the freeze has caveats: Residents would only receive the tax rebate if their local officials abided by the cap, and, in the second year, if local officials made a plan to share or consolidate services with their neighbors. Mr. Cuomo has cited the number of local governments as a reason property taxes are so high.“What I’m trying to do is use democracy — use the homeowner’s desire for the freeze — to pressure the local government to make cuts,” he said on Friday.But local officials view the proposal as an attempt by the governor to exert an undue amount of influence on municipal and school budget-making. They argue that the requirement to consolidate or share services would be difficult to achieve.Some lawmakers have also complained that the freeze would disproportionately benefit taxpayers in wealthy communities like the New York City suburbs, who pay higher taxes and therefore would receive larger rebates.About 140 local officials — including Stephanie A. Miner, the mayor of Syracuse and the co-chairwoman of the State Democratic Party — have signed a letter that cites cuts to services like policing and says the freeze would make problems worse.“Fundamentally, this is bad public policy,” said Michael J. Borges, the executive director of the New York State Association of School Business Officials. “It’s bad for our schools, it’s bad for our students, and, ultimately, it’s bad for the State of New York, because what it does is further exacerbate the divide between the haves and the have-nots.”Lawmakers have been receptive to local officials’ concerns.The Democratic-controlled Assembly adopted a budget resolution this week that laid out what its members would like to see in the state’s next spending plan. The tax freeze was among the proposals the Assembly rejected.“The concern with the freeze is it doesn’t go all over the state, No. 1,” said Sheldon Silver, the Assembly speaker and a Manhattan Democrat. “No. 2, somebody’s benefit is contingent on some other elected official doing something in order to make them eligible for the freeze.”Senate Republicans, who control the chamber with an independent faction of Democrats, support freezing property taxes, but have reservations about the governor’s plan. The Senate’s budget resolution proposed a different freeze, which would give extra state aid to local governments and schools rather than rebates to taxpayers, and would make it easier for local officials to qualify for money.Senator John J. Flanagan, a Republican from Long Island, said the governor’s plan was “laudable in intent,” but too cumbersome.“It’s very difficult to explain,” Mr. Flanagan said. “It’s a lot easier for us to be able to say, here, your taxes are frozen — without like 19 different things attached to it.”Asked on Thursday about the Legislature’s opposition, Mr. Cuomo said the large number of overlapping local governments was a problem that needed immediate attention.“The Legislature doesn’t want any grief for the local elected officials,” the governor said in a radio interview. “I understand that, especially in a campaign year. But that’s the chronic problem we have to deal with, and I’m not going to let them run from it.”In his budget, Mr. Cuomo also proposed a tax credit for homeowners for whom property taxes take a certain part of their income, a program known as a circuit breaker. The Assembly supported that idea in its budget proposal, but the Senate rejected it.