MADRID — Lawmakers in Spain overwhelmingly approved on Wednesday an abdication law that paves the way for Crown Prince Felipe to ascend to the throne being vacated by his father, King Juan Carlos.But the parliamentary debate also highlighted the political and territorial tensions that await King Felipe VI, with Catalan lawmakers abstaining from the vote and instead calling on the new king-to-be to endorse their plan to hold a referendum on independence. The debate was also disrupted by a handful of left-wing parliamentarians, who waved signs demanding a referendum on whether to maintain Spain’s monarchy.Speaking in Parliament, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy praised Juan Carlos, particularly for serving as the “skillful pilot of a transition filled with risks,” having come to the throne in 1975, two days after the death of the dictator Gen. Francisco Franco. Almost four decades later, Felipe was taking over with the clear backing of Spanish society, Mr. Rajoy said.“Never in the history of the past two centuries has a succession taken place with such normality as this one,” he said.That claim, however, was immediately questioned by some lawmakers who addressed Parliament after Mr. Rajoy. Josep Antoni Duran i Lleida, parliamentary spokesman for Convergence and Union, the governing party in Catalonia, said instead that Catalans had recently been “excluded from the history of Spain,” by the country’s mainstream parties, as well as by a king who refused to recognize Catalan demands for greater autonomy. Catalonia’s regional government is planning a November referendum on independence that Mr. Rajoy’s government has declared illegal and has vowed to prevent.“I hope the new king will be sensitive to the demands of the Catalan citizenship, as well as the crisis of our institutions,” Mr. Duran i Lleida said.Lawmakers from the lower house of Parliament approved the abdication law with 299 votes in favor, 19 against and 23 abstentions. Senators are expected to approve the abdication law next Tuesday.Thousands of protesters took to the streets of Spain last week after King Juan Carlos announced his abdication. In fact, 62 percent of Spaniards want a referendum on the monarchy, according to an opinion poll published last Sunday by the newspaper El País and carried out by Metroscopia.“We have full legitimacy to demand a referendum,” Cayo Lara, the leader of the United Left party, told lawmakers on Wednesday. “Today’s debate is about whether we want to deepen Spain’s democracy or whether we want to continue with a system that is at times despotic.”Mr. Lara described the monarchy as “an anachronistic institution” and warned lawmakers of the consequences of not holding a referendum: “I’m sure the Spanish people will make you pay in the future the decision that you’re taking today.”However, Mr. Rajoy’s Popular Party holds a parliamentary majority, so the outcome of Wednesday’s vote was a foregone conclusion. Alfredo Pérez Rubalcaba, leader of the main Socialist opposition party, also managed to quell dissent among the Socialists, with only two of them abstaining during Wednesday’s vote.Felipe VI is set to be crowned on June 19 in a ceremony purposefully designed to be low key. Europe’s other royal families and foreign leaders will not attend.Still, the debate over the monarchy is set to continue in coming weeks, particularly over what title and legal status Juan Carlos should be given after his abdication. Under Spain’s constitution, only the king is guaranteed full legal immunity. But the government is looking to offer the king a special protected status, which is also granted to some other public officials and retired lawmakers and would ensure Juan Carlos could only be tried by the country’s highest courts.The king’s abdication comes amid heightened scrutiny into the spending habits of the royal family, particularly of his 48-year-old daughter, Princess Cristina, and her husband, Iñaki Urdangarin, the Duke of Palma, who is at the heart of a corruption investigation into whether he and business associates embezzled millions from organizing sports events.