GAINESVILLE, Ga. — Ending a case that involved questions about the line between rhetoric and criminal conduct, a judge on Friday sentenced two men to a decade each in prison for their roles in a plot that included using ricin in a series of attacks in major cities.The decision by Judge Richard W. Story, of the Federal District Court, came nearly 10 months after a jury here convicted Samuel J. Crump and Ray H. Adams on a pair of charges connected to possession of ricin for use as a weapon. Mr. Crump, 71, and Mr. Adams, 58, could have been sentenced to life imprisonment; prosecutors had asked that the men be ordered to spend 20 years in prison.“This is not some laughing old guys talking kind of thing,” Judge Story said. “We’re talking about conduct that could have hurt innocent people if you had been able to carry it out.”In a statement, the United States attorney, Sally Quillian Yates, said: “Both the words and actions of these defendants supported an idea dangerous to our democracy — that violence is justifiable when citizens grow frustrated with government.”Mr. Adams and Mr. Crump were arrested, along with two other men, in November 2011 after the federal authorities accused them of participating in a sweeping antigovernment plot that included a plan to disperse ricin simultaneously in five American cities, tentatively Atlanta; Jacksonville, Fla.; Newark; New Orleans; and Washington.Investigators said that Mr. Adams had kept castor beans, which are used to manufacture ricin, in a storage container at his Toccoa, Ga., home, and that Mr. Crump had provided one to an undercover informant.The informant, who was facing prosecution on unrelated charges when he first contacted the authorities, recorded conversations that included details of the men’s plans. The other men who were charged, Frederick Thomas and Dan Roberts, pleaded guilty in 2012 and were sentenced to prison terms of five years each.But on Friday, Mr. Adams and Mr. Crump, who wore yellow prison jumpsuits in the courtroom, both denied that they had intended to follow through on their conversations.“I would not have hurt anyone,” Mr. Adams said, adding, “I get angry at the government sometimes, but no more than anyone else.”Mr. Crump was more defiant. He asked Judge Story for a new trial and repeatedly complained that prosecutors had relied on an informant he deemed unsavory. But he also disputed the seriousness of the plans he discussed.“There were only words, no actions,” he said. “The only thing I did was talk.”Mr. Crump, by his own acknowledgment, was something of an excessively ambitious conspirator.“There’s no way I could make that stuff,” Mr. Crump said of ricin. “It takes a scientist and a million dollar lab, which we didn’t have.”Judge Story agreed that it was unlikely that the plans Mr. Adams and Mr. Crump mapped out would have been successful. But he said the evidence he heard during the two-week trial this year showed that the men had done more than merely brainstorm ideas.“We don’t prosecute people for talking,” he said.