LONDON — The man whose death at the hands of a police officer in 2011 set off riots that shocked Britain was killed lawfully, a jury found on Wednesday, issuing a decision that was sharply criticized by the dead man’s family.Mark Duggan, who was 29, was shot dead by the officer in August 2011 in the Tottenham neighborhood of north London. After his death, protesters in north London confronted police officers and violence erupted, spreading first to other parts of London and then to other urban areas across England. The police struggled to contain a level of unrest for which they proved ill-prepared.Britons were unnerved both by the widespread looting and burning of shops, and by the revelation that some of those who were prosecuted for violence came from comfortable, middle-class backgrounds.On Wednesday, the inquest jury at the Royal Courts of Justice decided, by a vote of 8 to 2, that Mr. Duggan had been killed lawfully. The decision was greeted with shouted protests, and the dead man’s mother, Pamela Duggan, left the court in tears. Carole Duggan, Mr. Duggan’s aunt, rejected the verdict, saying her nephew had been “executed.”The main point in dispute during the inquest was whether Mr. Duggan was armed when he was shot. The jurors concluded that Mr. Duggan did not have a gun at that moment, but they also said it was more likely than not that he had thrown a firearm from a taxi just before he was killed.The verdict was welcomed by the Metropolitan Police. Mark Rowley, an assistant police commissioner, said that armed officers were sent out thousands of times a year and fired shots only once or twice a year.“These careful tactics have significantly reduced gun crime,” Mr. Rowley said in a statement read outside the court.“It is significant, then, that a jury of Londoners, who have seen and heard all the evidence, have today concluded that not only was the operation to stop Mark Duggan in the taxi conducted in a way which minimized, to the greatest extent possible, recourse to lethal force, but that Mark Duggan had a gun, and also that our officer had an honest and reasonable belief that Mark Duggan still had the gun when he shot him,” he added.But the member of Parliament who represents Tottenham, David Lammy, said the police’s reputation had not emerged unscathed. “Policing in this country, as in any democracy, depends on consent, trust and legitimacy,” he said. “The shooting of Mark Duggan exposed just how fragile these bonds are.”“I have seen firsthand in Tottenham how, when efforts are made on both sides, these relationships improve significantly,” Mr. Lammy added in a statement. “It is imperative that this process now continues with renewed vigor.”