YANGON, Myanmar —  When he looks back on his years as a political prisoner, U Htein Lin thinks of a dark and damp place, of being blindfolded and beaten by guards, the meatless watery soup and the black plastic bucket that served as a toilet. And yet now, as a free man, something draws him back.A decade after he was freed, Mr. Htein Lin has twice returned to prison to help teach a 10-day Buddhist meditation course, an undertaking that on one occasion led to an unplanned encounter with one of his former jailers.He says he volunteered for the courses as a sort of civic duty; meditation helped him survive his own incarceration, and he wanted to pass on that skill to prisoners and guards taking the course.But also — and this is a point he says many people will probably not readily understand — he wanted to reconnect with a sense of confinement. As an artist, prison was where he produced some of his best work.“I see my life, the ups and downs, and think it’s like a story,” he said recently. “I look back and the downs are part of the story, too. This is the reason I wanted to go back.”Mr. Htein Lin was sentenced by the military government for helping organize a pro-democracy protest, a common reason that the paranoid junta used to lock people up.But unlike most political prisoners, Mr. Htein Lin emerged from more than six years of detention with something to show for it. While still in prison, he managed to produce and smuggle out around 300 paintings and sculptures. Some were sent to the International Institute of Social History in Amsterdam, which archives art related to Burmese history.Old prison uniforms were his canvases, and syringes and the flint wheels of cigarette lighters served as paint brushes. In vibrant colors, he painted abstract images of mangled, emaciated prisoners, crenelated walls, locks and haunted faces. He sculpted bars of soap into the likenesses of prisoners crammed into cells.“I was completely cut off from art critics and an audience,” he said in an interview at his apartment in Yangon. “I just did what I wanted. In the cell I found freedom. It was the most important time in my art career.”It is not unusual for former political prisoners to have complex and ambivalent feelings about their days in detention.“Only people who have been in prison can understand these feelings,” said U Win Htein, a member of Parliament who spent 14 years as a political prisoner.Like veterans of a bloody war, former prisoners have a sort of kinship, a common understanding of a common painful journey.Mah Thandar, a democracy activist who spent six years in prison, resumed her political activism as soon as she was released in 2012. Last year, she was sentenced to one month in prison for helping lead a protest against a planned copper mine. She describes a sort of perverse homecoming when she re-entered the prison walls, reconnecting with prison guards, some of whom hugged her.For her, as with other democracy activists, prison remains the symbol of her fight against dictatorship, her persistence and fortitude in the face of injustice.“I am not saying life in prison is joyful,” Ms. Thandar said. “It’s a waste of time. But I expect I will be imprisoned again. I am preparing for this. We will never give up.”Of all the crimes during five decades of military rule in Myanmar, one of the most egregious was the incarceration of thousands of people: students, journalists, politicians and democracy activists. Some of the country’s brightest minds were stuffed into dank prisons dating to British colonial days, a network of jails that in some respects had changed little since George Orwell was a police officer here in the 1920s.About 2,000 prisoners were freed by the nominally civilian government that came to power in 2011. But the scars of their incarceration remain.It is hard to overstate the prominence of former political prisoners in Burmese society today. Some, like the democracy activist Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, are full-time politicians who serve in Parliament with their former persecutors. Others are leading journalists and intellectuals.Mr. Htein Lin is recording their stories in a project he calls “A Show of Hands.” He has made plaster casts of the hands of more than 360 former political prisoners; they are stacked in his living room.His arrest in 1998 was for plotting a demonstration to mark the 10th anniversary of a popular uprising that was violently suppressed. Like the two dozen other people arrested with him, he was not allowed a lawyer. On the day of the sentencing, the judge picked up an envelope on a table, opened it and announced his seven-year sentence.Mr. Htein Lin’s fellow political prisoners mocked the judge. He recalled them shouting, “Are you sure that sentence is long enough?”Prison, he says, destroyed his family. He was cut off from his daughter, who to this day calls him “uncle,” not “daddy.” While he was in prison, his wife left him and his father died; it took two months for him to receive the news.He survived prison with meditation, his art and his unremitting defiance of his captors.“I never accepted how I was treated,” he said. “You need to constantly fight.”After he was freed in 2004, he met Vicky Bowman, the British ambassador. She arranged to spirit some of his work out of the country by diplomatic pouch. They bonded over a mutual interest in contemporary art, fell in love and married.In 2006, they left Myanmar for England. They returned to Myanmar in 2012, after the junta relinquished control and the nominally civilian government began the democratic transformation that is still a work in progress.When Mr. Htein Lin made his first visit back to prison, in March, nearly 100 prison guards had assembled for the course.Three-quarters of the guards had been ordered to take the course by their superiors because of disciplinary problems or drinking, said U Maung Maung Lwin, a retired businessman who led the meditation course.“It’s easy to instill discipline among the prisoners, but it’s more difficult with the prison guards,” he said. “They are accustomed to giving orders, not receiving them.”Mr. Htein Lin’s role in the course was paradoxical for a former prisoner: to make sure the guards were silent. The prisoner had become the enforcer.He surveyed the room and met eyes with U Ko Ko Naing, one of his former guards.“He recognized me,” Mr. Htein Lin said. “I said, yes, I am here. I am helping you. But I would be very happy if you could follow my instructions.”