WASHINGTON —  The sudden and decisive fall of the House majority leader, Eric Cantor of Virginia, at the hands of a conservative primary opponent tore open divisions among Republicans on Wednesday, setting off a new wave of fear that the internecine feuding would stymie policy-making and imperil Republican presidential prospects in 2016.Mr. Cantor’s 11-point loss to David Brat, an economics professor, occurred just when party leaders were beginning to believe they had finally extinguished the Tea Party-versus-establishment civil war, and offered a stark reminder that anger among conservative activists is still boiling.The upset, unrivaled in the history of congressional primaries, will immediately push Republicans to the right, almost certainly end any prospect for an immigration overhaul this year, and empower hard-liners like Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, who believe the Republican Party has not kept faith with a vocal base that demands unflinching opposition to President Obama.“What the Republican establishment and the Chamber of Commerce don’t understand is that there’s a large element of America that wants a fight,” said former Speaker Newt Gingrich. “If you’re a conservative, you think Barack Obama is literally destroying the country you love. And you watch your leadership and they seem unwilling to take him head on, and also unable to outmaneuver him.”That fury will ensure a gridlocked capital for at least the rest of this year and perhaps for the remainder of Mr. Obama’s presidency. It also raises new doubts about Washington’s ability to conduct the most basic functions of government, suggesting the possibility of another round, or rounds, of brinkmanship on funding the government and measures to keep the country from defaulting on its debt.Should Republicans take control of the Senate and retain the House this November, even these most fundamental acts could prove difficult because of fear among Republican members that any hint of cooperation with the president will encourage a primary challenge. After all, Mr. Cantor had sought to block the so-called fiscal grand bargain negotiated by Mr. Obama and Speaker John A. Boehner — and now he has been deemed insufficiently conservative by the party’s base.Party strategists said even the narrowest openings left to compromise in a polarized city had all but vanished.“Republican members of the Senate and House are going to be extraordinarily skittish about taking risks,” said Glen Bolger, a Republican pollster. “All it takes is one high-profile crash and nobody wants to fly on airplanes for a while, and that’s what happened.”For some Republicans looking at the next presidential campaign, however, Mr. Cantor’s defeat at the hands of an opponent who assailed him for being open to an immigration overhaul could have an even more damaging impact in the long run. Even as party officials debate how significant a factor immigration was in Virginia, the fear that addressing it could alienate the party base may prevent any action on immigration legislation in the next two years. That could leave Republican presidential contenders with a significant disadvantage as they face an increasingly diverse electorate in 2016.“There is no doubt there will be a chilling effect among those who use this as anecdotal evidence on immigration, particularly in the House caucus,” said Mike Murphy, a Republican strategist and one of the closest advisers to Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida. “That’s the big danger.”Mr. Murphy added, “The necessity of reconnecting with the Latino vote is far bigger than a congressional primary in Virginia, and the party, for the sake of its own self-interest, has to understand that.”Both Mr. Bush and Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida and an author of the Senate’s immigration overhaul, are weighing presidential campaigns and are carefully gauging just how animated their party is on immigration.So is Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, who opposed the Senate bill last year but said Wednesday that he still supported the concept of an overhaul.“We’ve been somewhat trapped by rhetoric and words, and amnesty is a word that’s trapped us,” Mr. Paul said on a conference call organized by advocates of immigration reform.Yet to conservatives, Mr. Cantor’s defeat was only the latest, and loudest, evidence that Republican leaders are detached from the rank-and-file of a party that wants confrontation rather than compromise.Mr. Cruz seized on the Virginia results and the coming runoff election in Mississippi, where the six-term Republican senator Thad Cochran is in serious jeopardy of losing to a Tea Party-backed challenger, to fire a warning shot at his own party.“In both instances, voters decided they wanted something different from business as usual in Washington,” Mr. Cruz, who is a vice-chairman of the Senate Republican campaign arm supporting Mr. Cochran, told reporters. “That’s a powerful message that I hope every elected official hears.”Such comments by Mr. Cruz frequently inflame establishment-aligned Republicans. But on Wednesday, as Republican members of Congress walked quickly through the Capitol, their feelings seemed especially raw.“You already have national groups out there who had nothing to do with this taking credit for it, raising money off it, and we’re going to have guys stand up today and say, ‘See, I told you,’ ” Representative Pat Tiberi, an Ohio Republican and a lieutenant of Mr. Boehner, said with evident irritation about the aftermath of Mr. Cantor’s loss.Yet even mainline party strategists said that Republican officeholders needed to understand the lessons of Mr. Cantor’s loss and the dire threat Mr. Cochran is facing, and come to grips with the diminished appeal of traditional political levers at a time of deep discontent toward Washington.“Seniority, in Cochran’s case, and power, in Cantor’s, is not what people are asking for,” said Bruce Haynes, a Republican consultant. “They are asking for people in charge to listen to them, connect with them, understand them.”Pointing to Senator Lindsey Graham, the South Carolina Republican who was one of the authors of last year’s Senate immigration bill, Mr. Haynes said the peril for incumbents of his party was not so much ideological deviation but drift from constituents. Mr. Graham easily won on Tuesday, the culmination of a yearslong fund-raising effort and grass-roots campaign to prepare for a conservative primary challenge that was inevitable, given his role as an outspoken deal maker.“Graham stayed connected,” Mr. Haynes said. “Cantor and Cochran didn’t.”That Mr. Brat had no support from national conservative groups and did not receive significant mainstream news media attention, yet still won, underscores the way that loose and highly motivated networks of activists can doom unprepared incumbents.“The days of just going to Washington and things happening in a vacuum are over,” said Matt Moore, chairman of the South Carolina Republican Party. “We’re in an era where Facebook, Twitter and email make it so easy for people to mobilize.”As the reality of Mr. Cantor’s loss set in among Republicans, Democrats were already moving to exploit it, first by pinning Washington’s dysfunction on their opponents.“I think we’re looking at at least five months of mayhem and right-wing panic, which dooms Republicans’ willingness to compromise on virtually any issue,” said Representative Steve Israel, Democrat of New York and the chairman of the House Democrats’ campaign arm.And in Chicago, the second stop on her book tour, Hillary Rodham Clinton saw her own opening to castigate the hard-liners in Washington.“Without compromise, you don’t have a democracy,” Mrs. Clinton said. “You have people who believe that it’s their way or the highway.”