WASHINGTON — Charlie Sifford is a man of few words, but on Monday he was nearly moved to tears.Nearly.Decades of fighting, breaking barriers and enduring the slings and arrows of discrimination can build an immunity to displays of emotion.On Monday, Sifford, 92, a retired golfer, allowed himself to smile. And why not?He was among an illustrious group of 18 recipients of the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation’s highest civilian honor. There was Stevie Wonder close by, Meryl Streep behind him, Isabel Allende and Ethel Kennedy down the row to his right. All had contributed to the nation’s cultural richness. Sifford had broken barriers.In 1961, he became the first African-American to join the PGA Tour, ending an arduous climb that had begun decades earlier as a caddie.Often called the Jackie Robinson of golf, Sifford might have endured even more than Robinson. There was no national scrutiny, no daily media, to record his struggles. There was no Branch Rickey to run interference, no teammates to lean on. There was Sifford, walking alone on golf courses where hateful spectators were free to spit, swear and intimidate. It was awful.He was not part of a grand plan to integrate golf. He was doing it on his own, largely for a pragmatic reason.“I had to make a living,” he said.And the keepers of the gate were determined not to let him. The PGA’s Caucasian-only clause kept everybody who was not white — not only black people — off the PGA Tour.Had someone told Sifford in 1954 that 60 years later he would be at the White House being honored by the first black president of the United States, “I wouldn’t have believed it,” he said.I had come here to write about him, but the most gripping part of the ceremony came when President Obama introduced the daughter of James Chaney, the brother of Andrew Goodman and the widow of Michael Schwerner. The three young civil rights workers, participants in the Freedom Summer campaign to register black voters who were systematically being blocked from the voter rolls, were murdered in Mississippi in 1964.Sifford was 42 at the time and living in Charlotte, N.C. As he listened to the president recite the history and background of the murdered men, he felt the same feeling coming back and taking over. “I got mad,” he said.I remember 1964 as a year when America’s obsession with sports clashed with its ambivalence about racism.In 1964, Bill Russell led the Boston Celtics to another N.B.A. championship. Jim Brown led the Cleveland Browns to the N.F.L. championship. And Bob Gibson pitched the St. Louis Cardinals to a World Series title.Fifty years later, blacks have virtually disappeared from baseball; a handful of black golfers are on the PGA Tour; and no black women currently play on the L.P.G.A. Tour. The N.F.L. and the N.B.A. are dominated by highly skilled, well-compensated and largely silent African-Americans.The communities from which most of them come are nowhere near as united — physically or philosophically — as they were in 1964, when African-Americans, regardless of education and occupation, lived together, worked together and struggled together against racism and oppression.In 1964, the United States preached democracy and freedom to the rest of the world even as its own citizens were being brutalized as they fought for equal rights. In 2014, the United States wages war on multiple fronts, still in the name of democracy, while police violence and mass incarceration continue to be plagues.The sacrifices of Chaney, Goodman and Schwerner, and also Sifford, endure as a blueprint for what will be required to slay the new dragons. The blueprint calls for perseverance, courage and determination.At a reception before the ceremony, President Obama told the families of Chaney, Goodman and Schwerner that he would not have become president had it not been for the courage of men like them.Had Sifford not endured, had he not helped remove the Caucasian-only clause, which confined access and opportunity, there might not have been a President Obama, either.Late Monday evening, at a room inside the Capitol, about 150 people gathered to honor Sifford. They were politicians, family members and a contingent from the University of Maryland Eastern Shore’s golf team and golf management program.They knew about the Sifford legacy and talked about carrying the torch — as players, instructors and entrepreneurs.Monday was a good day for Sifford. Weakened by failing kidneys and a weak heart, the first black golfer to earn a PGA card sat proudly as the first black president of the United States placed the Presidential Medal of Freedom around his neck, and as the families of Chaney, Goodman and Schwerner looked on.This was a wonderful moment and a reminder, still, that there is no freedom without sacrifice.