Good evening. Here’s what you need to know from NYT Now:• The popular Obama.“The paradox of the first lady is that she’s most politically effective when she is not overtly political.”That’s our reporter Jodi Kantor on Michelle Obama’s unique position in politics as she takes to the campaign trail rallying voters on behalf of candidates for governor.She has a certain credibility with voters, Ms. Kantor says, because she has stuck to her “mom in chief” role in public, shying away from contentious political subjects to instead discuss issues like childhood obesity.“She can in effect say to audiences, Believe me, I’m just looking at this as a mom, I’m here because I care about our children’s future,” says Ms. Kantor, who wrote a book about the first couple.It is unclear whether Mrs. Obama’s appearances will be enough to turn the tide of a governor’s race.“But in closely fought contests,” Ms. Kantor says, “everything counts.”• Hong Kong’s end game.It doesn’t have to end in bloodshed.Even though some have drawn parallels between Hong Kong’s pro-democracy protests and those in Tiananmen Square in 1989, there are still nonviolent ways out.“Some kind of compromise might still occur,” says our Hong Kong bureau chief, Keith Bradsher.Beijing’s leaders won’t accede to the protesters’ demands for Hong Kong’s top executive to resign, but they might agree to tweak the voting process for his successor, Mr. Bradsher says.And they might “open a longer-running political dialogue,” he says.But the government may be able to wait the protesters out. Hong Kong residents are getting frustrated with the disruptions to the city, and small businesses are suffering.“The crowds are already a little smaller than early this week,” Mr. Bradsher says, “and eventually many protesters may feel a need to return to classes or jobs.”• Can “Homeland” get its groove back?The spy drama starring Claire Danes started as a critical darling, only to fall off.As the show returns Sunday to Showtime for its fourth season, critics have expressed a measure of hope. The headline on  one review: “'Homeland’ Is Good Again.”But reclaiming its former beloved status among television tastemakers would be defying the odds, says Mike Hale, our TV critic.He pointed to some acclaimed shows that lost their luster: “'Lost’ is probably the No. 1 example; more recently, ‘True Blood’ and ‘The Killing,’ which got about a half-season of critical love.”“None of those shows got their aura back,” Mr. Hale says.“I think that’s partly because there’s a lot of inertia and groupthink among critics,” he says, “and partly because shows actually do tend to decline over their life spans.”“A continuing TV show is a big, bureaucratic operation and it takes a lot of work to reinvigorate it or change its course.”• All too real.A New Jersey woman was sentenced Thursday to 15 months in federal prison on conspiracy and bankruptcy fraud charges.The tabloids and social media were all over it.That’s because Teresa Giudice is not just a housewife. She’s a “Housewife,” a suburban mother transformed by Bravo into a well-known name by appearing on the “Real Housewives of New Jersey.”By now, the network has perfected the formula.“The creators of the ‘Housewives’ series would probably be the first ones to admit that it does not take much to create celebrities,” says Susan Dominus of The Times Magazine, who has written about the network.They do it by finding “relatively good-looking, wealthy people who are willing to make themselves look ridiculous before the public,” she says.“Add some conflict and drama, just enough humanity, and the authority that a television camera confers sort of does the rest.”MARKETS• Wall Street stocks rose. The S.&P. 500 gained 1.1 percent.TONIGHT• Back in front of the camera.After directing the Oscar-winning “Argo,” Ben Affleck returns to acting in “Gone Girl,” based on Gillian Flynn’s popular thriller and opening nationwide today.Mr. Affleck plays a husband who’s accused of killing his wife (she disappears on their fifth wedding anniversary). You’ll need some extra time, though, if you want to see it: The movie clocks in at 149 minutes.Here’s what else is new in theaters.• Week in review.On “Washington Week With Gwen Ifill”: Carol Leonnig of The Washington Post and The Times’s Peter Baker discuss the Secret Service failings; Time’s Michael Duffy on the first case of Ebola in the United States; and The Times’s John Harwood speaks about the midterm elections. (8 p.m., PBS, check local listings, as times may vary)• Baseball playoffs.The St. Louis Cardinals, the defending National League champions, won against the Los Angeles Dodgers, 10-9, in Game 1 of their division series.And the Kansas City Royals, back in the playoffs for the first time in 29 years, got their third postseason win this week, against the Los Angeles Angels, 4-1.• If you’re staying up …On “Real Time With Bill Maher”: Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts; the neuroscientist and noted atheist Sam Harris; the actor Ben Affleck; Nicholas Kristof, a columnist for The Times; and Michael Steele, former chairman of the Republican National Committee. (10 p.m. Eastern, HBO)“The Tonight Show”: the actress and writer Emma Thompson, who revived the century-old Peter Rabbit character with a new children’s book, and the comedian Dane Cook. (11:35 p.m. Eastern, NBC)“Late Show With David Letterman”: Mariska Hargitay of “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit”; the comedian Simon Amstell; and Kandace Springs, the soul singer whose first E.P. was released this week, makes her debut performance on television. (11:35 p.m. Eastern, CBS)THIS WEEKENDSaturday• A six-acre landscape portrait made from dirt and sand and titled “Out of Many, One” goes on display on the National Mall. It is a composite portrait of several people photographed in Washington.• Also in Washington, the #DCFerguson demonstration will be calling for the arrest of the police officer who fatally shot an unarmed black teenager in the St. Louis suburb, and for the demilitarization of police departments.• Sarah Silverman hosts “Saturday Night Live” for the first time. Maroon 5 is the musical guest. (11:35 p.m. Eastern, NBC)• Baseball playoffs: San Francisco Giants at Washington Nationals (5:30 p.m. Eastern, FS1); St. Louis Cardinals at Los Angeles Dodgers (9:30 p.m. Eastern, MLB).SUNDAY• Brazil holds presidential elections, with Dilma Rousseff seeking a second term. She is facing a serious challenge from Marina Silva, the Socialist candidate.• More than 250 bishops gather at the Vatican for a two-week synod, the first under Pope Francis, on family and marriage. Conservative and progressive cardinals are already trading insults.• A new phase in the search for Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 begins with deep-sea search vessels.• “Homeland” begins its fourth season. (9 p.m. Eastern, Showtime)• Baseball playoffs: Baltimore Orioles at Detroit Tigers (3:45 p.m. Eastern, TBS); Los Angeles Angels at Kansas City Royals. (7:30 p.m. Eastern, TBS)Adeel Hassan and Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.Your Evening Briefing is posted at 5 p.m. weekdays.Don’t miss Your Morning Briefing at 6 a.m. weekdays.What would you like to see here? Email us at nytnow@nytimes.com.Follow us on Twitter: @nytnow.