NEW DELHI —  At a major gathering of the Indian National Congress party on Friday, Sonia Gandhi, the party’s president, announced that her son, Rahul, would not be formally nominated for the post of prime minister ahead of general elections, a decision made after prolonged deliberation within a party braced for a punishing race.“We took a decision on Rahul yesterday, and the decision is final,” she said.Mr. Gandhi, 43, will lead Congress’s coming campaign, and he made clear in a speech a few hours later that he was open to serving as prime minister after the elections, if Congress legislators choose him.Analysts said the decision not to nominate him on Friday was mainly a tactical one, aimed to insulate him from a presidential-style, head-to-head campaign against Narendra Modi, head of the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party. Mrs. Gandhi said the decision had little significance because the party has not traditionally named prime ministerial candidates before elections.Mr. Modi seems eager to campaign against Mr. Gandhi, casting himself, the son of a tea stall owner, as a self-made man and Mr. Gandhi as a privileged “shehzada,” or prince. After Friday’s announcement, members of the Bharatiya Janata Party gloated, saying Congress was afraid to thrust Mr. Gandhi into the ring with Mr. Modi.“The nervousness is palpable now,” Arun Jaitley, an opposition party leader, wrote in a statement published on social media. “Why puncture your card in an adverse political environment? There is no fire in the belly left to fight adversity.”Damaged by a series of corruption scandals and a flagging economy, Congress looks unlikely to retain control over the next Parliament, especially after poor results in four state assembly elections held in December.At the televised gathering on Friday, Mrs. Gandhi cast the national elections, scheduled for May, as a “battle for the preservation of our age-old secular traditions,” warning that a victory by Bharatiya Janata, a Hindu nationalist party, could introduce a dangerous religious divide.Mr. Gandhi took the podium a few hours later and delivered a long, passionate speech. He mocked the marketing used by his adversaries as slick but dishonest, saying they could “sell combs” and “give haircuts to bald people.” His toughest lines were aimed at the opposition party, whose campaign is increasingly focused around the charismatic, divisive figure of Mr. Modi.“Democracy cannot be ruled by dictatorship, it cannot be ruled by one man,” he said. “We don’t respond by turning against each other, nor by lighting communal fire.”Mrs. Gandhi seemed relieved at the warm reception her son received, saying at the close of the event: “For the last few days, we got ourselves worried, but there is no need of that. The energy and excitement which I am seeing in this call is proof that when we decide, we can do anything.”Not naming Mr. Gandhi the prime ministerial candidate means sacrificing some of his star power in a country where many revere his father, grandmother and great-grandfather, who all served as prime minister.Mr. Gandhi has at times projected reluctance about his public role, refusing offers of a cabinet-level post and rarely speaking at parliamentary sessions or expressing a stance in national debates. In an interview published in a Hindi newspaper on Tuesday, he sidestepped a series of questions about whether he intended — or even wanted — to become prime minister.“I will follow whatever orders the party asks me to follow,” he said. “I am only concerned about why the entire argument comes to a standstill over the issue of a ‘post.’ Why is it being debated on a national level? Why don’t people debate about steps to clean politics?”Siddharth Varadarajan, a prominent journalist, called the decision not to nominate Mr. Gandhi “an insurance policy, an exit strategy, a safety valve,” allowing him to escape damage if Congress performs badly.Congress leaders are braced to become the minority party in May, he said, but may see an opportunity to bounce back in several years if the newly formed government proves fragile and collapses. And in that event, he said, the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty will continue — if not through Rahul, then through his sister, Priyanka, who is widely viewed as a talented politician.But he added that in his view, the family would be wise to gradually untether itself from the party.“The way to do it would be to say, ‘We recuse ourselves, and we will keep a distant watch,’ ” he said.“If they had the best future of the Congress party in their mind, they would realize that the dynasty has to end, and it has to end in an orderly fashion,” he said. “I don’t think it’s going to happen.”