SEOUL, South Korea —  Local election results on Thursday showed the main opposition party winning nine of 17 races for big-city mayors and provincial governors in what was seen as a referendum on the leadership of President Park Geun-hye.Candidates from Ms. Park’s governing Saenuri Party won the remaining eight races on Wednesday, a showing that neither it nor the opposition could call a clear-cut victory. The president has been struggling to shore up support for her government since a ferry disaster in April that killed hundreds, the vast majority of them young students.Although they do not directly affect the makeup of the central government, local elections in South Korea are often treated as a vote of confidence on the president and the governing party. Since 1998, voters have never been generous toward governing parties in the balloting.Ms. Park’s party had hoped to break that pattern — until the ferry sank off southwestern South Korea on April 16 and her once-high popularity plummeted. The disaster and the public criticism of her government’s fumbling on the search and rescue have come to define Ms. Park’s presidency so far.Candidates from her party easily swept races in its traditional support bases in southeast South Korea. The New Politics Alliance for Democracy, the main opposition party, clenched those in its strongholds in southwest South Korea. Regional favoritism remained entrenched in the rival regions, their party loyalty rarely wavering in elections regardless of individual candidates.In the most closely watched race, the opposition candidate Park Won-soon was re-elected as mayor of Seoul, the capital. He beat Chung Mong-joon, a conservative politician and billionaire tycoon of the Hyundai shipbuilding conglomerate, by a comfortable margin.The victory by Mr. Park made him a hot prospect for the 2017 presidential election, analysts said.In battles for swing-vote regions, a Saenuri Party candidate was elected governor of Gyeonggi Province, the country’s most populous, which surrounds Seoul. The party also won the mayoral race for Incheon, a big port city west of Seoul.But the opposition candidates won elections in the Chungcheong provinces in central South Korea and in Daejeon, a major city south of Seoul.Ms. Park has apologized several times for failing to prevent the sinking of the ferry Sewol and vowed in tears that she would fight a culture of corporate greed, regulatory negligence and government incompetence that she said contributed to the scale of the disaster. Under pressure from critics to overhaul her government and presidential staff, Ms. Park moved to replace the prime minister, the head of the intelligence agency and her top national security adviser.  She also vowed to disband the Coast Guard for failing in the rescue efforts.South Korea remains deeply divided between mostly old conservatives and mostly young liberals. During the election campaign, candidates from the liberal opposition billed the local elections as a chance for South Koreans to “punish Park Geun-hye.” But candidates from the governing party rallied conservatives by calling on them to “save Park Geun-hye.”In the Wednesday balloting, South Koreans also elected small-city mayors and county chiefs. Governing party candidates won a majority of those races. But opposition candidates won most of the races for superintendents of education.