MADRID —  El País, Spain’s leading daily newspaper, ousted its top editor on Tuesday in a new sign of economic turmoil in an industry in which the leaders of two other top Spanish papers were recently replaced amid slumping advertising and dwindling circulation.The departure of the El País editor, Javier Moreno, was announced in a hastily convened newsroom meeting. El País established itself as Spain’s leading newspaper in the late 1970s during a critical period in the country, when Spain returned to democracy after the death of the dictator Francisco Franco.Advertising revenues at Spain’s newspapers have fallen by about 65 percent since 2007, the year before the financial crisis started. Yet the newspapers have continued to expose systemic corruption and secret Swiss bank accounts that have tarnished major institutions in Spanish society, including the government, the monarchy and corporate titans.“It is clear that the government and powerful economic institutions are exploiting the crisis in the business model and the weakness of newspapers to try to control more and more information,” said Pedro J. Ramírez, who was ousted this month as the editor of another newspaper, El Mundo. “Pluralism is really suffering.”The shake-up at El País came after Antonio Caño, a Washington correspondent who will be the paper’s new editor, mistakenly emailed a memo to other correspondents, outlining a vision to reach out to “new majorities.” Mr. Caño has also been overseeing the paper’s coverage of Latin America.In addition to the switches at El Mundo and El País, a third newspaper, La Vanguardia, based in Barcelona, ousted its editor, José Antich, in December. Under his leadership, the newspaper supported the independence movement in Catalonia, but it has since moderated its stance.In the case of El Mundo, the owners cited sagging revenues in replacing Mr. Ramírez, who helped found the paper 25 years ago. El Mundo has long followed a more conservative line, but it has aggressively reported on corruption, including a case involving the governing party and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy, and another involving the son-in-law of King Juan Carlos.Mr. Ramírez, who remains a columnist with the newspaper, said he suspected that Spain’s government and monarchy had retaliated against him for El Mundo’s corruption coverage.In October, El País weathered labor disputes after it announced plans to cut a third of its staff. Prisa, the newspaper’s owner, has been struggling under a mountain of debt, even after receiving about $1.2 billion from Liberty Acquisition Holdings, an investment company based in New York. In December, Prisa completed a refinancing deal with its banks, giving it more time to repay an estimated $4.4 billion.Mr. Moreno, the editor of El País since 2006, is set to remain in place until May. He will take a new position with the company in its Latin America expansion effort. “The newspaper business is getting increasingly complicated and tough because of all the problems we all know,” he said. “I think if you bring new blood into the job, it’s not a bad idea.”