BOGOR, Indonesia —  Even as a young man, Bima Arya Sugiarto seemed a sure bet to gain membership into the exclusive club of Indonesia’s political elite.When he was 26, he helped found a national political party after the country began its transition to democracy following the collapse of the military-backed government of President Suharto in 1998. By his late 30s, Mr. Bima was running one of the top political consulting firms in Jakarta, whispering advice to national politicians twice his age.This spring, however, Mr. Bima, now 41, left the political machinations of the Indonesian capital and returned home to Bogor, a quaint West Java mountain city, to be sworn in as its new mayor. In a country known for damaging levels of official corruption and waste, he spends his time trying to plug “leakages” that drain as much as 30 percent of Bogor’s budget, questioning why his predecessor had a $16,000 clothing allowance, and focusing on issues like health care and local education that many Indonesian politicians ignore.“I’m committed to change the paradigm of what is a leader,” Mr. Bima said in an interview, discussing his decision to run for mayor, rather than for a safe seat in the national House of Representatives. “We are civil servants — we are not the rulers.”Mr. Bima is one of a small but growing group of political upstarts who have headed out of the capital in recent years to pursue political careers in local government, and who have been encouraged by the recent success of Joko Widodo, who made his name as a wildly popular small-city mayor and is now leading in polls to become president. Although the political mavericks come from different political parties and are not formally aligned, they are united in a belief that 16 years after Mr. Suharto’s rule ended, the Indonesian public is increasingly fed up with the pace of change, the level of corruption and what they see as a lack of accountability.While the country has shed its authoritarian past, analysts note that most of the country’s current leaders are the products of or holdovers from the Suharto era — including former Army generals — and have never lost an aloof, paternalistic governing style in which citizens’ concerns are something of an afterthought. And in the last five years, dozens of current and former members of the House of Representatives have been convicted of corruption and sent to prison.The new crop of politicians is trying to set itself apart by pushing good governance and a zero tolerance for corruption, as well as going out and talking to the masses in the streets or at public meetings.“There is a clear trend right now,” said Ramlan Surbakti, a professor of political science at Airlangga University in Surabaya, whose mayor, Tri Rismaharini, is a member of the group of new leaders. “This new generation is trying to get elected into positions of leadership, but not in Jakarta.”Part of the move to the countryside, Mr. Ramlan said, is political expediency, a way around the Old Guard whose members still act as power brokers in the capital. But he said many of the younger leaders are also trying out a new style of governing in places where they are less likely to be pressured into following established political rules often more focused on accruing power than meeting basic needs.“One of the common characteristics among this group is that they are quite independent of the national leadership in their respective political parties, despite being members,” Mr. Ramlan said.Analysts say the early successes of the group, especially in attracting accolades in the national press, might eventually loosen the grip on power by the Suharto-era politicians — a group that includes the outgoing president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, a retired Army general; former President Megawati Sukarnoputri, the daughter of founding President Sukarno; and Aburizal Bakrie, who leads the Golkar Party, Mr. Suharto’s political vehicle during his 32-year rule.“If you are a regional-level leader and you have integrity, openness, transparent governance and a focus on anticorruption, you get re-elected and you catch the eye of national political party leaders,” said Doug Ramage, a Jakarta-based political analyst. “And eventually, down goes the political party elite.”That trend, experts say, would accelerate if Mr. Joko — the standard-bearer for the new-style politicians — is elected president, especially since he would do so by besting Prabowo Subianto, a former Army general and Mr. Suharto’s former son-in-law.Popularly known as “Jokowi,” Mr. Joko, the former mayor of Surakarta, skyrocketed to national political prominence in 2012 after winning the gubernatorial election in Jakarta as a dark-horse opposition candidate.Since then, he has followed a pattern that he set in Surakarta. He regularly visits Jakarta’s slums and traditional markets to speak with residents about local issues including education, health care and the city’s notorious traffic problems.To tackle political corruption, he has come up with creative workarounds, issuing welfare payments on the equivalent of electronic gift cards, for instance, to allow people to pay for health care directly and ensure government officials do not take a cut off the top.The normally aggressive Indonesian news media has seemed completely mesmerized by his “man of the people” style, helping drive his popularity.“The idea of getting a clean leader from outside the mainstream appeals to the press,” said Wimar Witoelar, a political commentator and talk-show host. He said that sheen is wearing off on the politicians trying to emulate his style, a group the news media calls “mini-Jokowis.”Mr. Ramlan, the political science professor, said that a victory by Mr. Joko in the presidential election next month would send a clear signal that Indonesian voters were beginning to reject leaders linked to the Suharto government.“But I think this trend would continue regardless of who wins,” he said. “I think the people are fed up with the old kind of self-serving leadership.”Still, no one is betting that this younger generation will completely sweep out the entrenched political elite anytime soon. Even Mr. Joko’s running mate and senior members of his campaign team are either Suharto-era figures or prominent members of the political elite that emerged after his downfall.Ultimately, however, Indonesia’s power brokers, and their political followers, will face a powerful challenge out of their control.“Half of the population today is below 29 years old, and most of them cannot relate to older politicians who are above 60, like Megawati, Prabowo, or Bakrie,” said Fauzi Ichsan, a prominent Indonesian economist with Standard Chartered Bank in Jakarta. “The demography is moving in younger politicians’ favor.”