CHICAGO — Hillary Rodham Clinton chose her hometown for the first public forum during a nationwide tour to promote her new book. And she shared the stage with an old friend, Mayor Rahm Emanuel.“Welcome home to Chicago,” Mr. Emanuel said to Mrs. Clinton, who discussed “Hard Choices,” a memoir about her time as secretary of state that was released on Tuesday.Mrs. Clinton grew up in the close-in suburb of Park Ridge and first met Mr. Emanuel when she was the first lady of Arkansas. Mr. Emanuel worked on Bill Clinton’s 1992 presidential campaign, and went on to serve as a top White House adviser to Mr. Clinton before starting his own political career as a member of Congress.The interactions between Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Emanuel — who sat relaxed on black armchairs onstage at the Harris Theater for Music and Dance — seemed part love-fest and part heated debate, providing tantalizing glimpses into a more than 20-year relationship between two of the biggest and most polarizing personalities in Democratic politics.“I go back a long way with the mayor,” Mrs. Clinton said. “He is his own form of an energy source. I’ve often thought if there were ever a blackout in Chicago, have Rahm hold some kind of cable, and Chicago would electrify again.”But like most political alliances, there has also been friction. As a member of Congress from Illinois, Mr. Emanuel remained neutral during the 2008 Democratic primary, when Mrs. Clinton was locked in a heated battle with Barack Obama, then a senator from Illinois.Mr. Emanuel went to work for Mr. Obama and played a key part in persuading Mrs. Clinton to serve as secretary of state. “He was making it impossible for me to say no” to Mr. Obama, Mrs. Clinton said.At one point during the question-and-answer session, Mrs. Clinton talked about her 1995 speech about women’s rights in Beijing and how the West Wing had questioned whether she should deliver it. Mrs. Clinton joked that Mr. Emanuel was among the senior advisers who told Mr. Clinton: “There she goes again. Can’t you control your wife, Mr. President?”Last month, Mr. Emanuel joined a growing list of prominent Democrats who have endorsed the outside group Ready for Hillary, designed to build grass-roots support should Mrs. Clinton decide to run for president in 2016. “Hillary is smart, she’s determined, and most importantly, she is a champion for the American people,” Mr. Emanuel said in a statement.Federal campaign laws prohibit Mrs. Clinton from coordinating with Ready for Hillary or any other “super PAC.” But she did call Mr. Emanuel to thank him for his support, as she has done with several other Democrats who have offered an early endorsement, said three people familiar with Mrs. Clinton’s thank-you phone calls.Ready for Hillary parked a “Hillary Bus” outside the theater, where volunteers handed out stickers and signed up attendees. The 1,500 people who bought $50 tickets to the event also received a signed copy of “Hard Choices.”The Chicago setting — and Mr. Emanuel’s line of questions — gave Mrs. Clinton the chance to point to her middle-class roots amid Republican attacks that her paid speeches to Wall Street and multimillion-dollar book income have made her out of touch with average Americans.Mr. Emanuel did not shy away from controversial comments Mrs. Clinton made in an ABC News interview about the financial struggles she and her husband faced after leaving the White House. “Hillary, dead broke, really?” he asked.She smiled and said, “That may not have been the most artful way” of describing their financial situation.Mr. Emanuel opened with a question about Mrs. Clinton’s mother, Dorothy Rodham, and how her childhood in Park Ridge had served as her “North Star” throughout her career.Mrs. Clinton talked about her mother’s hardships and about her father, who served in the Navy and owned a small business. “Chicago is at the real core of my family, who we are, where we came from,” she said.The sold-out event, part of Chicago Ideas Week, was promoted as a platform for Mrs. Clinton to discuss the foreign policy decisions she chronicled in “Hard Choices,” but it also provided an opportunity for her to weigh in on domestic issues.When asked about the surprise results of the Republican primary on Tuesday in Virginia in which a Tea Party candidate, David Brat, defeated Representative Eric Cantor, the majority leader, Mrs. Clinton said Mr. Cantor had been defeated “by a candidate who basically ran against immigrants.”Of the rise of anti-establishment candidates in both parties, Mrs. Clinton said, “Don’t vote for anyone who says they are against compromise,” adding, “They are saying they are against the American experiment in democracy.”Even Newt Gingrich, who as the Republican speaker of the House in the 1990s clashed with Mr. Clinton, understood the importance of compromise, she added.