The debate over net neutrality and cable company concentration has been rattling Wall Street.This discomfort is evident in some unusual moves in the share prices of Comcast and Time Warner Cable, the two cable giants that announced in February that they intended to merge in a $45 billion all-stock deal. While their adjusted prices should be converging — if you assume the merger will eventually be completed without major problems — the spread has actually widened strikingly since early September.Regulators in Washington and in some state and local governments are reviewing the merger. As regulatory issues crucial to cable companies and the Internet have heated up, the stock market has reacted with varying degrees of consternation.“The prices haven’t really been moving in the way you’d expect in a merger,” said Jeffrey Wlodarczak, C.E.O. of Pivotal Research, a market research firm.While he said he expected the deal to be completed eventually, “when you look at the numbers, there’s obviously concern about what the F.C.C. and other regulators are going to do — whether they’re going to let the merger go through, or whether they’ll tie a lot of conditions to it.”Investor concerns focus mainly on the Internet side of cable operations. They include these questions: Will the Federal Communications Commission act to ensure an open Internet — also known as net neutrality — and competitive and reasonably priced choices for consumers, in ways that might impair cable company profitability? Will federal agencies block the merger outright, or impose conditions that might make it economically unattractive? And if the merger does not take place, auguring a tougher regulatory climate, are the two companies, particularly Time Warner Cable, appropriately priced?As always, the market is converting the collective intelligence of its participants into prices, and there is evidence that investors are worried. “No question, if you look at the prices, you see that the market is factoring in some problems,” said Mike McCormack, an equity analyst at Jefferies. “Investors are worried that onerous conditions could be imposed on the deal.”Understanding this requires a little number-crunching. It works like this: Typically, after a merger is announced, the adjusted share prices of the two companies ought to move closer together. In this case, Comcast, the biggest cable company in the United States, agreed that when it ultimately acquires Time Warner Cable, the second-biggest such company, each Time Warner Cable share would be converted into 2.875 Comcast shares. In other words, assuming the merger were a sure thing, we’d know what a Time Warner Cable share should be worth each day: 2.875 times the current price of a Comcast share. Until the deal closes there will be a gap, but it generally ought to be narrowing.I set up a spreadsheet to monitor whether the shares were moving in the right direction, and was startled to see that for the most part they were not: The values of the shares have generally been diverging. The spread, or the difference between the adjusted prices of the two companies’ shares, was roughly 5 percent at the announcement date. In subsequent months, it gradually widened to 6 percent. On Sept. 4, by my calculations, the spread crossed 7 percent for the first time.Craig Moffett, senior analyst and a partner at MoffettNathanson Research, who has been closely following these developments, pointed out that Sept. 4 was when Tom Wheeler, the F.C.C. chairman, said in a speech that “there is simply no competitive choice for most Americans” who want high-speed Internet in their homes.“Stop and let that sink in,” Mr. Wheeler said. He added that “three-quarters of American homes have no competitive choice for the essential infrastructure for 21st-century economics and democracy.”Mr. Moffett said of those words: “That was a very strong speech for the chairman of the F.C.C. The market took notice.”One core problem for Comcast and Time Warner Cable is that after a merger, the combined company would control more than 35 percent of the market for high-speed wired Internet service, even after divesting itself of some customers. If, as Mr. Wheeler said, that market is not competitive now, a merger of the two biggest cable companies would not help matters.In October, the price spread widened further, to well above 10 percent at several points. In the last week or two, it has oscillated between 8 and 10.5 percent. Again, market action came after news that might have caused investors to do some recalculating of the future profitability of Comcast and Time Warner Cable, either as independent companies or as a merged entity.One market flurry occurred after remarks by President Obama at an Oct. 9 town hall meeting in Santa Monica, Calif., in which he said he was “unequivocally committed” to net neutrality and against “paid prioritization,” or Internet fast lanes, in which some companies could pay cable companies for faster access to consumers. He called for tough rule-making by the F.C.C. — which could potentially limit the profitability of the cable companies.And late last month, people close to the F.C.C. said the commission was considering several options for net neutrality rule-making. These include regulating Internet infrastructure companies more strictly — as common carriers, like the old telephone companies — under Title II of the Communications Act of 1934. Such regulation would be imposed over wholesale interconnections between information providers and broadband carriers like the cable companies. Under one possible plan, less stringent regulations would be imposed by the agency for Internet connections from cable companies to customers.Mr. Moffett is among those who believe this could be the path to a “grand bargain,” which would include approval of the merger, with guarantees from Comcast that it would abide by strict, nondiscriminatory open-Internet rules. “It could be possible,” he said, “to preserve the economics of the deal and to come up with some satisfactory answer to net neutrality.”But there is another possibility. It was raised by Tim Wu, the Columbia University law professor who coined the phrase “net neutrality” and made it part of his platform in his unsuccessful bid to become lieutenant governor of New York. Mr. Wu said the widening market spread “may be evidence that people in the know understand that the odds of the merger being blocked have increased.” Once you scrutinize the “anticompetitive potential in it, and the anticompetitive nature of the broadband market,” he said, it’s understandable that “the mood has certainly shifted, and the markets are asking whether this merger will survive.”Net neutrality and the merger are political issues. After last week’s election, they could become a flash point in relations between a Republican Congress and the Democratic administration. Strong action by the F.C.C., the Federal Trade Commission or the Justice Department could result in Republican pushback aimed at limiting the F.C.C.’s authority.Where all of this is heading isn’t clear, which means there’s good reason for the market to be jumpy.“I think in the end, the deal will probably go through,” said James C. Goss, an analyst at Barrington Research. If it does, he observed, Time Warner Cable shares are a bargain when compared with those of Comcast. The price spread amounts to a discount that would close when the deal is done. “You can make some good money with that trade,” he said. “But clearly, the risks in making it have risen.”