Most people disappear from the headlines into the gray anonymity of Rikers Island after they are found guilty in state court in Manhattan.But for Cecily McMillan, the 25-year-old Occupy Wall Street organizer convicted on Monday of assaulting a police officer, her incarceration has served only to heighten her profile.As her admirers have taken to Twitter in droves to criticize the judge and the district attorney for their handling of the case, Ms. McMillan has gotten sympathetic treatment on “The Daily Show With Jon Stewart” and friendly coverage from left-leaning media outlets like Democracy Now!, The Guardian, The Nation and The Village Voice.That trend reached a peak on Friday, when two members of Pussy Riot, the Russian protest group that was incarcerated for staging a political performance against President Vladimir V. Putin, trooped out to Rikers Island in the drizzle to visit Ms. McMillan in a show of support.“It was a very bad decision to put her in jail,” said one member, Nadezhda Tolokonnikova, 24, as she came through the jail’s hurricane fence, which is topped with razor wire, and lit a cigarette.“She’s a professional revolutionary.”Her colleague Maria Alyokhina, 25, urged Justice Ronald A. Zweibel to sentence Ms. McMillan to probation and community service rather than prison. She said a harsh sentence would lead to unflattering comparisons to Russia, where they served 21 months for playing a raucous protest song in Moscow’s main cathedral.“Society must organize to save Cecily because she’s really a hero,” Ms. Alyokhina said. “She is very similar to us. We also did time and went to prison for our beliefs. We see a lot of parallels.”The groundswell of support for Ms. McMillan includes some of the jurors who convicted her in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.On Thursday, a juror who said he spoke for nine members of the panel took the highly unusual step of writing a letter to Justice Zweibel, asking that he show leniency.“We feel that the felony mark on Cecily’s record is punishment enough for this case and that it serves no purpose to Cecily or to society to incarcerate her for any amount of time,” the juror, Charles Woodard, wrote, according to a defense lawyer, Martin R. Stolar. Juries have no say over sentencing in criminal cases.Justice Zweibel could sentence Ms. McMillan, who was convicted of second-degree assault, to as little as a stint of community service or as much as seven years in prison.The judge remanded her to jail after the conviction until a sentencing hearing on May 19.The jury found that Ms. McMillan had deliberately elbowed a police officer, Grantley Bovell, in the face as he led her out of Zuccotti Park in Lower Manhattan during a protest on St. Patrick’s Day in 2012.That protest had started as a way to mark six months since the founding of Occupy Wall Street.Though she had taken part in many other protests, Ms. McMillan testified that she had not joined in the civil disobedience that night. She had been out drinking beer with a college friend and went to the park only to pick up another acquaintance, she said.She testified that she did not recall hitting the police officer, though she said she did remember throwing her elbow instinctively when she thought someone had grabbed her right breast, which was bruised during the arrest.A grainy videotape from an onlooker appeared to support the officer’s version of events, showing her hitting him in the eye, then running a few steps before he tackled her.Since their release from prison in December, the members of the Russian protest group have started a nonprofit, Zona Prava, whose mission is to improve conditions in Russian prisons. They have also used their status as global symbols of political freedom to promote feminism, gay rights and more transparency in Russian politics.Earlier this week, they met with senators in Washington to discuss what they view as Russian human-rights abuses, including the long incarceration of several protesters arrested during a May 2012 opposition rally in Bolotnaya Square in Moscow.They were contacted by Ms. McMillan’s supporters on Thursday and then agreed to go to Rikers.Ms. Alyokhina and Ms. Tolokonnikova, who were accompanied by Petya Verzilov, a member of their arts collective, said Ms. McMillan had appeared to be upbeat and thriving, though she said she missed her cigarettes.Ms. Tolokonnikova said Ms. McMillan had kept busy organizing other female inmates to write letters on her behalf to the judge.A Russophile, Ms. McMillan impressed her visitors with her knowledge of Soviet history and poetry, discussing the absurdist poet Daniil Kharms. “It’s really incredible to see someone that positive in prison,” said Mr. Verzilov, who served as a translator.Ms. Alyokhina said Ms. McMillan had talked at length about how she now wanted to start a social revolution in America. “She told us about the revolution maybe 20 times,” her visitor said. “It’s really very important to her.”