Melville House, an independent publisher based in Brooklyn, will publish the Senate Intelligence Committee’s newly released “Study of the Central Intelligence Agency’s Detention and Interrogation Program,” the executive summary of a government report that details the widespread use of gruesome torture techniques by the C.I.A. in its counter-terrorism efforts.Melville House is rushing the 480-page book into production, with an on-sale date of Dec. 30. Melville House paid no advance for the material, which is in the public domain and available for free online. The full 6,000-page report remains classified; only the summary has been released.Unlike some other publishers that have printed earlier government reports, Melville House says it is not getting any financial or other support from the government to offset production or shipping costs.In some ways, the report is right in the imprint’s wheelhouse. Melville House was founded in 2001 by the fiction writer and journalist Dennis Johnson and the sculptor Valerie Merians with the mission of publishing poetry written in response to the Sept. 11 attacks. Though it is well known for its fiction, it has also published nonfiction books on the nuclear threat posed by Pakistan and on the C.I.A.'s secret detention facilities.In a statement, Mr. Johnson called the report, which was five years in the making and based on more than six million internal C.I.A. documents, “probably the most important government document of our generation, even one of the most significant in the history of our democracy.”He said he hoped that publishing the dense and disturbing report as a book would encourage more people to dig into it.“Our fear was that, with all the distractions of the holiday season, the report would fade quickly from the news cycle,” he said.Other government reports, like the 9/11 Commission Report and the infamous Starr Report detailing President Bill Clinton’s sex scandal, have sold hundreds of thousands of copies. Melville House is anticipating a substantial audience for what is being called “the torture report,” and is planning a first print run of 50,000 copies.