The Hong Kong police warned Tuesday that they would clear the last major protest camp in the city beginning on Thursday, potentially ending a pro-democracy movement that has challenged the government for more than ten weeks.Cheung Tak-keung, a police spokesman, said at a news conference that the police would remove blockades in the main protest camp, near the city government headquarters, on Thursday, including on roads not specified in a court injunction. He urged demonstrators to pack their belongings and leave the site as soon as possible.“For those who refuse to leave, the police will take enforcement action,” he said, adding that such action could be dispersal or arrest. “We will not leave much time for protesters to pack up on Thursday morning.”Earlier moves to clear protest areas resulted in clashes between protesters and the police; more than 100 demonstrators were arrested in a two-day period. The removal of roadblocks late last month in Mong Kok, a shopping district, led to violence as protesters tried to retake their sites.Roadblocks at a smaller site in Causeway Bay, a bustling commercial district, will be removed after the clearance of the main protest site, Mr. Cheung said.On Tuesday afternoon, bailiffs put up notices across a long stretch of the main site, where protests began in late September against election restrictions imposed by the Chinese legislature on the next vote for Hong Kong’s leader in 2017. The notices asked that people not “prevent or obstruct normal vehicular traffic from passing” in the areas. Mr. Cheung said that offenders could be prosecuted for contempt of court.In the areas designated in the court injunction, which cover only a small part of the whole protest site near the government offices, the clearance will be carried out by representatives of the applicant for the order, a bus company, and when necessary the bailiffs and the police, Mr. Cheung said. After assisting bailiffs to enforce the injunction, he said, the police will remove roadblocks in the adjacent areas, including those on sidewalks. RTHK, a local public broadcaster, reported that a total of 7,000 police officers would be deployed on Thursday.The police will use a level of force proportionate to the level of the protesters’ resistance, the police spokesman said, adding that people should avoid going to the area on Thursday “unless it is absolutely necessary.”The notice of the latest clearance comes as protest leaders and participants are divided over whether to go home, stay or even resist any removal attempt. A Tuesday night rally at the protest camp indicated that some of the movement’s most prominent leaders were still not ready to throw in the towel.“We hope to see you all again on Thursday morning,” said Alex Chow, the leader of the Hong Kong Federation of Students, one of the two main student groups behind the protests, to an ovation from hundreds of supporters. He urged the demonstrators, however, to stick to their principle of nonviolent protest.A recent attempt by some protesters to break the glass doors of a government office building in the area resulted in an erosion of public support.Joshua Wong, the 18-year-old leader of the youth protest group Scholarism, echoed those sentiments, urging protesters to stay on but adding that gear the protesters had stockpiled at their camp — including homemade shields and umbrellas — should only be used for defensive purposes.