FRONT PAGEAn article on Wednesday about the tactical discussions doubles partners in professional tennis have between points misspelled the surname of a player. As a picture caption with the article correctly noted, he is Bradley Klahn, not Kahn.•An article on Tuesday about the crumbling infrastructure of Los Angeles misstated the size of the city’s annual budget. It is $8.1 billion, not $26 billion, which is the budget of Los Angeles County.•Two picture captions accompanying an article on Monday about the Obama administration’s struggles to close the prison in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, misstated in which camp the photos were taken. The pictures of a detainee climbing stairs and of detainees having lunch were shot in Camp 6, not Camp 5.INTERNATIONALAn article on Tuesday about three Americans incarcerated in North Korea who were interviewed by CNN and The Associated Press with the permission of the North Korean authorities misspelled the given name of one of the Americans in some copies. He is Matthew Todd Miller, not Mathew.•Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Monday with an article about the challenges facing the Hong Kong democracy movement after the imposition of a restrictive voting plan by the Chinese authorities gave an incorrect description, in some editions, of what was occurring in a Reuters photograph and also misidentified the photographer. The photograph was of a clash involving demonstrators and the police outside a hotel. It was not an interruption of a speech by demonstrators. The photograph was taken by Tyrone Siu, not Bobby Yip.•A map that accompanied an article on Monday about the effects that plans for a new capital for the recently divided Indian state of Andhra Pradesh are having on a remote part of the state reversed the positions of the towns of Vijayawada and Agiripalli. Vijayawada is just north of the Krishna River and Agiripalli is northeast of Vijayawada, not the other way around.BUSINESS DAYAn article on Sunday about a pending guilty plea from Charles Shrem, a prominent supporter of the digital currency Bitcoin, misstated in one instance which office was handling the prosecution of Mr. Shrem on charges of aiding and abetting the operation of an unlicensed money transfer business. As noted at one point in the article, it is the United States attorney’s office, led by Preet Bharara, not the Manhattan district attorney’s office.•The Media Equation column on Aug. 25, about Vice Media, misstated, in some copies, when the company gained access to the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un through a stunt with Dennis Rodman and the Harlem Globetrotters. It was last year, not at the beginning of this year.SCIENCE TIMESAn article on Tuesday about efforts to improve robots’ touch and motion control misspelled the surname of a Stanford education professor who helped develop kits that can be programmed to create virtual devices like springs and dampers. He is Paulo Blikstein, not Blickstein. The article also referred incompletely to the design of the kits; they were designed by a team, not by Dr. Blikstein alone. And a picture credit with the article misidentified the photographer who took a picture of Stanford graduate students testing bands that vibrate in response to arm motions. He is John Todd, not Kristina Copplin. The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper's journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.