A FEW years ago, more or less out of the blue, I began to take my daughter, Hattie, to dance performances. She’d turned 12, and we seemed to be losing each other, just a bit, to our changing lives and cooing cellphones. It seemed like a way to clear out some time to be together.We were absolute beginners. She’d never caught the ballet bug as a child. I knew little about dance, the major art form you’re least likely to feel pressed to come to terms with in college. I’d nearly sworn off dance entirely in the mid-1990s, after being taken to see Pina Bausch’s company at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.In my hazy and unhappy memory, that performance consisted of distressed women lugging bricks from one side of the stage to another for hours, symbolizing the rude and pointless burden of being. Their faces brought to mind Munch’s “The Scream” — or, better, Shelley Duvall’s in “The Shining,” when Jack Nicholson shatters the bathroom door. I fled to a scary bar (Brooklyn was different then) at intermission.Yet gradually, the ballet has become our thing. We’ve grown intimate with New York City Ballet’s deep and foxy repertoire. We can tell Balanchine’s choreography from Robbins’s, and Christopher Wheeldon’s from Peter Martins’s. We go elsewhere, too. When possible, we slip into the Joyce Theater in Chelsea and the McCarter in Princeton, N.J. In the summer, we swat flies with our programs at Jacob’s Pillow.As a simple bonding exercise, this has been lovely. Everything about our dance-night ritual is a treat: the wearing of our better shoes; the pop-in beforehand at Ricky’s NYC, the grungy beauty supply store; and dinner at P. J. Clarke’s, across from Lincoln Center: a martini and the raw bar for me, a Caesar salad and the restaurant’s Parmesan Tater Tots for the vegetarian Hattie.I expected that we would enjoy these nights in the city. What I didn’t anticipate is that dance would become so important to both of us that we would — to paraphrase a line from Arlene Croce, The New Yorker’s longtime dance critic — lean forward so often in our seats and watch the stage with shining eyes. That dance would come to seem, on its best nights, like an art form that towers above the others.Part of this joy for me, no doubt, comes from witnessing a wonder through Hattie’s eyes, from allowing her delight to fire my own. This is among the best reasons not to give your children up for adoption the moment they become teenagers.Hattie is moved by ballet’s ritual intensity, by its mastered modes of movement, all those birdlike bones and the hydraulic lifting. I am moved that she can appreciate all this while also appreciating, as Martha Graham and dance’s other modernists have taught us, that beauty is not a woman’s only option.Another part of the joy I take in dance comes from finding a new window on culture and the world later in life. (I’m 49.) Writing criticism, specifically book criticism, which I do, is fundamentally the process of filling in, in public, the gaps in my incomplete education. Nowhere are those gaps wider than in dance.Critics have always helped me to make sense of the world, and dance is no exception. Reading Ms. Croce’s work deeply, as well that of Deborah Jowitt, Robert Gottlieb and my remarkable colleague Alastair Macaulay, among others, is time well spent.Mr. Gottlieb owns what might be the best dance mind on the planet. A legendary editor who worked at Knopf and The New Yorker, he also edited an encyclopedic yet nimble volume called “Reading Dance”  (2008). I often see Mr. Gottlieb at the ballet, which feels to me not unlike running into Aristotle at the ancient theater of Epidaurus.Part of the brewing drama of ballet is the sense of young ballerinas battling for status, a simmering psychodrama stretched to dark effect in Darren Aronofsky’s “Black Swan” (2010), a sinister eyeful. Hattie and I feel lucky to have come of age as dance fans at the same time that Sara Mearns, a principal dancer at City Ballet, has moved into her prime. Part of the delight of dance is playing favorites, and Ms. Mearns has been ours from the second we saw her.Dance isn’t a democracy, and Ms. Mearns, a native of South Carolina, is one of its casually spellbinding aristocrats. In her every moment onstage, she seems to dramatize the struggle between liberty and discipline. With her arched back, uplifted head, epic wingspan and a joyful command that radiates to her fingertips, it’s impossible to unglue your eyes from her. We’ve seen Ms. Mearns in dances by Balanchine, by Robbins, by Mr. Martins, as well as in “Swan Lake,” in which she played Odette/Odile.Mr. Macaulay has skillfully appraised her gifts. “She’s compellingly made up of contradictions: child and woman, vulnerable and audacious, naïve and voluptuous,” he observed. “Her eyes are small, but their focus is rivetingly theatrical. Her shoulders are high, even tense, but her spine — one of the wonders of the dance world — is powerfully supple. Her figure is curvaceous, and there’s a thread of steel running through those legs.”There is a thread of steel in every movement Ms. Mearns makes, yet also threads of ambiguity and irony. You see her and you think: How is she not a household name?We’ve come to appreciate, as well, the occasional falls we’ve seen onstage. (This happens more often than you would think.) They’re scary and exciting, and they underline the difficulty of what you’re observing. Balanchine was said to have appreciated dancers’ falling in performance: It meant they were really going for it.One of City Ballet’s principal dancers, Ashley Bouder, is known for wiping out spectacularly once or so a season. While no balletomane looks forward to a fall, Ms. Bouder’s fans sense they’ve witnessed something special when they’re in the audience for one of her spills. They’re a sign, Balanchine would have agreed, of genuine intensity.Hattie and I are still feeling our way toward a real understanding of dance. I suspect it will be a lifelong process. There’s new language to acquire: placement, turnout, port de bras, jeté, sauté, fouetté. There are lists of companies to track down, films to watch. There are so many more dances to be seen at the David H. Koch Theater, City Ballet’s home, where relatively inexpensive tickets (as low as $29) can usually be had.It all sounds like pleasure. As someone who tends to approach everything by way of food, I also intend to investigate Balanchine’s favorite sandwich, the recipe for which is printed in Mr. Gottlieb’s “Reading Dance.”Here’s the recipe, in Balanchine’s words: “Take one-half of an untoasted Thomas’s English muffin, cover it generously with sweet butter, say about a quarter of an inch, spread a layer of excellent black caviar over the butter, at least one inch thick, and cover with the other half of the muffin. If you can’t afford lots of caviar, better to forget the whole thing.”All, or nothing at all — it’s the Balanchine way. One of these days, I’m even going to make a return trip to see Bausch’s choreography. Wim Wenders’s documentary  “Pina”  (2011) gave me fresh eyes for her work, and made Hattie want to attend her dances as well.We both wish Bausch’s company might borrow Sara Mearns for the night.