It is easy, as an American living in the 21st century, not to care that 100 years ago today, a 19-year-old Serb named Gavrilo Princip shot and killed Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and his wife, setting in motion the catastrophe that was the First World War.To many Americans, World War I was a muddled, confusing clash of powers that you moved through as quickly as possible in a long-ago history class on the way to studying World War II, which offers a comparatively simple good-versus-evil narrative, greater American involvement and riveting archival films.But when you want to understand why the world is as it is — the backdrop of some of the most important economic and diplomatic challenges of our era — the Great War is the first place in history to look. The clash of Russia and Ukraine; the euro zone debt crisis; and the civil wars in Syria and Iraq all have direct antecedents in the conflict that began exactly a century ago.More fundamentally, the conflict showed how fragile a liberal world order can be. The world, circa 1913, looked pretty great. The industrial revolution was raising living standards across Europe, democracy gradually becoming entrenched in more countries, and nations had become deeply intertwined by trade and financial interconnections.There were rumblings that a clash could be on the way, as the emerging power of Germany chafed against the old order of things. As conflict began in the summer and fall of 1914, a common view was that the skirmish would be over by Christmas. Instead, it was perhaps the greatest unforced error in modern human history, exacting a vast toll for what, with hindsight, was not much of a purpose at all.World War I not only lasted four years and cost perhaps 15 million lives on its own. It also sowed the seeds for the Great Depression, the rise of the Nazis and World War II. The Second World War can even be properly viewed as a redo, the price that was paid for botching the end of the first one. (It was evident to some at the time; John Maynard Keynes’s “Economic Consequences of the Peace,” written in 1919, is an uncannily prescient look at the forces unleashed by the Treaty of Versailles.)With the generation of men and women who witnessed the war almost all deceased, and the events themselves receding into the category of distant history, it is all the more important for us to understand the lessons of that period. I did so only when researching a book on the 2007 to 2012 financial crisis and the history of central banking, when it again and again became clear that to understand those recent events, particularly those concerning the near-collapse of the euro zone, I had to reach back a century to the (failed) economic diplomacy of that era.What are these lessons for today?It is a cliché, but an accurate one, that in dealing with Russia’s aggression toward Ukraine, Americans have been inclined to apply the lessons of World War II (don’t let territorial aggression go unchecked) where European allies have applied the lessons of World War I (don’t allow tit-for-tat escalation to take hold). Americans could do well to understand that both experiences offer important lessons in how to deal with an expansionist autocrat.As many commentators have noted, the emergence of China as a global economic powerhouse trying to assert itself has some eerie echoes of Germany’s rise in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. As China has skirmishes with Asian neighbors over claims on some minor islands in the Pacific, the historical lesson for leaders in both China and its regional rivals Japan and South Korea is to recognize that nationalistic temptations and no-compromise stances can make everyone far worse off.The global monetary system evolved in no small part in reaction to the failures of the Great War, starting with the Bretton Woods accords of 1944 that was something of a do-over after the mistakes of Versailles.The world economy and political system of today are far from perfect. But as in 1913, many trends are pointing in the right direction. Despite a perilous period for the global economy, the interconnections among the world’s most populous nations are arguably deeper than they were even a decade ago.But the lesson of the Great War is that this state of the world isn’t something we should take for granted. Rather, it’s something that every national leader, and every voter, should feel urgency to defend. The need to learn those lessons is why we study history to begin with, and one hopes the centennial of World War I can bring more people to come to grips with an episode in human history we might prefer to forget.