To what extent is the price of immortality humanity, as you could put it? Must the revolutionary artist ignore — even flout — the basic laws of decency that govern our world in order to transform that world? “Perfection of the life, or of the work,” as Yeats had it. “And if it take the second,” he went on, the intellect of man “must refuse a heavenly mansion, raging in the dark.”It was an ancient question even then, but somehow every other book I’ve been reading of late comes back to it. Walter Isaacson’s unbiddable 2011 biography of Steve Jobs presents his subject as a kind of Lee Kuan Yew of the tech industry, demanding we give up our ideas of democracy and control in exchange for a gorgeously designed new operating system. Innovation doesn’t have to be so dictatorial: Albert Einstein, the subject of Isaacson’s previous biography, is revered in part for his readiness to defer to what he didn’t understand. Yet the more we read about Jobs publicly humiliating colleagues and refusing to acknowledge responsibility for the birth of his first child, the more we see that his genius could seem inextricable from his indifference to social norms.That same spirit seemed to infect Lucian Freud, the subject of Geordie Greig’s compulsively readable portrait of the artist, “Breakfast With Lucian,” a book best accompanied by “Man With a Blue Scarf,” Martin Gayford’s elegant account of sitting for a picture by the man. Greig, a regular dining companion of Freud’s, serves up an excoriating close-up of a creature tearing through British high society, fathering as many as 30 children (some of whom he painted in the nude), seducing young women well into his 80s and getting into fistfights until his death. Gayford, meanwhile, watches the man from the other side of the canvas, and shows us an artist who’s captivating precisely because of his single-mindedness and the ravenousness of his energy. The lover of hasty couplings Greig describes becomes, in Gayford’s book, a perfectionist of rare focus who refuses to let even human connections complicate the human reality he’s trying to get down for all time.One of the intriguing features of Greig’s book is a quote on the back from V. S. Naipaul, expressing his admiration for Freud, the “dedicated artist” who stated, “I will paint myself to death.” Naipaul’s similar dedication is the obsession behind Hanif Kureishi’s latest novel, “The Last Word,” which examines the Freudian conundrum, as you could call it, through a barely disguised Indo-Anglian writer known for both the outrageousness of his public comments and the beauty and seriousness of his work. This Naipaul-like figure might almost be deliberately mocking the civilities of daily life in order to protect that part of him that gets that life down with such unsparing honesty, self-lacerating depths and, in fact, compassion.All of us know — we almost expect — that an artist will use up everyone he meets in the hope that the payoff in the public sphere will make up for casualties in the private. Even those of us without such gifts find it hard to serve two masters. Years ago, when I began writing, I noticed that the writing life and the happy (you could even say, the good) life lay in opposite directions. For the former I would have to take myself away from much that I cared about, and give myself over to the dark spaces in the world (and in the self) that I, like most of us, would rather look away from. Writing feeds on the tension — even the tragedy — that a happy life aspires to see beyond.But what intensifies the stakes today, as Naipaul perhaps intuited, is that we hunger for more and more information about the person behind every work and, alas, can get it. (Thank heavens Shakespeare and Homer are more or less out of our reach!) Every Philip Larkin or T. S. Eliot is judged now on the basis of stray comments in letters or diaries — soon it will be tweets and talk shows, too — instead of the works he labored to produce. Naipaul seems almost to be playing with that idea in the brilliant book he helped his authorized biographer, Patrick French, produce, “The World Is What It Is.” As one damning comment about V. S. Naipaul after another is delivered — by V. S. Naipaul — he might be cleverly pre-empting many a hostile biographer hungry to desecrate the work with the life.Thirty years ago, Philip Roth reminded The Paris Review that “literature isn’t a moral beauty contest.” It may even be an investigation of how beside the point conventional morality can be, especially in the making of literature. If the first requirement of the job is talent, the second is ruthlessness, and ruthlessness may be the more important because it’s more difficult to find. Even in the moral sphere, we cherish such heroes as Mohandas Gandhi and Martin Luther King Jr., although we know that they sometimes sacrificed their loved ones to a cause and did things they would themselves condemn. Wisdom is said to be beyond the reach of everyday good and bad.Yet the deeper implication of the books I’ve been reading is even more unnerving: The charisma that Jobs and Naipaul and Freud seemed to share appears to be not just a cause of their intense and original work, but, at times, an effect. The more they turned their backs on the world, spurning its every piety, the more others came flocking after them, all but begging to be devoured in their flames.