WASHINGTON —  Senator Patrick J. Leahy, chairman of the Senate subcommittee that oversees foreign aid, said Tuesday that he would not support additional military aid to Egypt in the wake of mass death sentences handed out by Egyptian courts this week, adding significant pressure on the Obama administration to shift course.For months, Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, has led a lonely effort to sever American support to one of its most stalwart allies in the Middle East after the military’s overthrow of Egypt’s elected Islamist government. That push appears to be gaining steam.“I’m not prepared to sign off on the delivery of additional aid for the Egyptian military,” Mr. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat, said on the Senate floor. “I’m not prepared to do that until we see convincing evidence the government is committed to the rule of law.”On Monday, an Egyptian court sentenced the top spiritual leader of the Muslim Brotherhood along with more than 680 others to death in connection with the killing of a single police officer during a riot last summer. Another court in Cairo banned the activities of a left-leaning protest group on espionage charges.Senate Democratic leaders and hawkish Republicans have been trying to keep Mr. Paul and his allies at bay, but even Mr. Paul’s most adamant Republican opponents said Tuesday that changes were needed.Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, said he would back the Obama administration’s pledge to deliver 10 Apache attack helicopters to the Egyptian military to try to bring peace to the Sinai Peninsula. But he said he would not back a larger $650 million military or economic aid package.“I’m not ready to invest in Egypt, on the military side, on the economic side, because I don’t know what I’m investing in,” he said. “I am very reluctant to put military assets or American dollars in an Egypt that I think is on a road to disaster.”Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, said he favored continuing military aid but wanted any economic assistance to be tied to democracy promotion and funneled through nongovernmental organizations.Meeting with Egypt’s foreign minister, Nabil Fahmy, in Washington on Tuesday, Secretary of State John Kerry flagged “disturbing decisions within the judicial process” that he said “raised serious challenges for all of us.”“We really are looking for certain things to happen that will give people the sense of confidence about this road ahead,” he said. “It’s actions, not words, that will make the difference.”For Mr. Paul, the sudden change in attitude is vindication of sorts. His efforts to demand a Senate vote to cut off all aid to Egypt have been rebuffed by Senator Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, the majority leader, with bipartisan support, but Mr. Paul’s insistence has made the issue a thorn in the side of the Democratic leadership and at times gummed up Senate operations.Mr. Leahy, as chairman of the Senate foreign operations appropriations subcommittee, has long wielded outsize influence on foreign aid decisions.“He’s influential,” said Senator Robert Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey and chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, who cautioned that any move needed to deal with “the totality of our interests.”Mr. Paul said he had been pressing Republican opponents to come around after recent actions by Egypt’s military government. “I would think there’s a strong argument that when a third of your population is not allowed to vote you’re not a democracy,” he said. “They just condemned 683 people to death.”Mr. Graham drew a distinction between Mr. Paul’s efforts to cut off aid in the early days of the Arab Spring and the surge of concern now.“Rand Paul wanted to disconnect from Egypt at a time when we could really have made a difference,” Mr. Graham said. “I don’t think this validates Rand Paul’s view of the world.”But it does present a major challenge to an Obama administration that has guarded its foreign policy prerogative from congressional interference.