Judge Jed S. Rakoff of the Federal District Court in Manhattan sent shock waves through the legal and financial establishments in November 2011 when he rejected a proposed $285 million settlement between the Securities and Exchange Commission and Citigroup. Judge Rakoff said it was impossible for him to say whether it was “fair and reasonable,” let alone in the public interest, after the bank “neither admitted nor denied” the S.E.C.’s accusations nor otherwise revealed any of the facts in a complex mortgage fraud case.Sparing defendants the need to admit that they had done anything wrong, or even to disclose any underlying facts, had pretty much become a way of life for the S.E.C. — until Judge Rakoff began questioning the practice.This month, the influential Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New York clipped the judge’s wings, saying he had “abused” his discretion. The opinion is brief, but so sweeping in its implications that it has alarmed a wide swath of lawyers who specialize in securities law.The court “is basically making it next to impossible to review any kind of settlement,” said Erik Gerding, associate professor at the University of Colorado Law School. Professor Gerding teaches securities law and wrote an article critical of the decision for The Conglomerate blog.While Judge Rakoff initially seemed suspicious that Citigroup might be getting off too easy — and public sentiment also seemed to favor that view — Professor Gerding said: “We also have to be concerned that regulators and prosecutors might be coercive, shaking down the banks and chasing headlines and then moving on. The banks are all paying with other people’s money.” And a $285 million fine for a bank the size of Citigroup, he noted, is so small that it barely qualifies as a cost of doing business.John C. Coffee Jr., a professor at Columbia Law School, called the ruling a “perfunctory” opinion and said it was a mystery to him why it took the court more than a year to write it. “An average law clerk could have drafted it in two days,” he said.To my surprise, even prominent corporate defense lawyers who said they felt that Judge Rakoff had gone too far told me this week that they were troubled by the appeals court’s reasoning and its implications. (They didn’t want to be identified, since they litigate before the Second Circuit.)So, with these comments in mind, I decided to don some imaginary judicial robes and write a dissent — the opinion that, in my view, the Second Circuit should have issued. (I’ve omitted all citations and footnotes, leaving those to my equally imaginary law clerks.)STEWART, Circuit Judge:The issue before this court isn’t whether Citigroup engaged in fraud in marketing complex mortgage-backed securities in the run-up to the financial crisis, as the S.E.C. said in its complaint. Maybe it did and maybe it didn’t.Nor is it our function to determine the appropriate fines or penalties. As part of the proposed settlement, Citigroup has agreed to pay $285 million and to refrain from future such conduct. Whether that’s a slap on the wrist or excessive punishment or just right isn’t for the courts to decide. Rather, the standard is whether the settlement is “fair and reasonable.”Thus, the question before this court is simply whether a district court judge can declare a settlement to be fair and reasonable if that judge knows nothing about the facts of the case.The founding fathers wisely provided checks and balances among the three branches of government. A major purpose of judicial review of agency settlements is to protect the public from government overreach or other misconduct. The S.E.C. and other regulatory agencies, while part of the executive branch, are deemed independent agencies, deliberately insulated from politics. It would be foolish to expect the political process alone to curb any abuses. Thus, judicial oversight is all the more important in cases like this.Here, the S.E.C. submitted for review only its complaint, leaving Judge Rakoff without “any factual showing whatsoever,” as he noted in his opinion. While the majority suggests he should just look at the S.E.C.’s “factual averments,” it should be obvious that a complaint is one side’s version of what happened. It should never be considered evidence of anything other than what the S.E.C. believes to have happened. Sometimes the S.E.C. is wrong, as its numerous losses attest — including a loss at trial of the lone individual charged in this affair, a former Citigroup executive, Brian Stoker.As a matter of simple logic, Judge Rakoff’s position would seem to be unassailable. How can anyone decide a punishment is fair without knowing anything about what occurred?That’s not to say that judges shouldn’t pay deference to the decision of the parties to settle and the terms they have agreed upon. The parties should have wide latitude to settle cases as they see fit. Courts should defer to the agencies they oversee, and shouldn’t substitute their own judgments for the agencies’. Nothing is inherently wrong with allowing defendants to settle while neither admitting nor denying the accusations, although that should never be used merely as an excuse to avoid trial and might be used too often. I note that the S.E.C. itself has since said it will try to curtail the practice in appropriate cases.But neither should judges, as Judge Rakoff’s lawyer put it, be reduced to “potted plants.” To approve a settlement, judges need some facts. This court doesn’t have to decide how many are enough; that should be decided on a case-by-case basis. But I do note that in this instance, relatively few seem to be in dispute. The offering document prepared by Citigroup, which is at the center of the case, is a matter of record. It would seem relatively easy for Citigroup and the S.E.C. to stipulate to a set of facts sufficient to satisfy Judge Rakoff, especially since both seem eager to put this matter behind them.After Judge Rakoff rejected a settlement between the S.E.C. and Bank of America on similar grounds, the parties produced a 35-page statement of facts. Judge Rakoff then approved the settlement.I take particular issue with the majority’s assertion that “truth” is a matter primarily for trials, while settlements, even when blessed by the judiciary, are concerned primarily with “pragmatism.” This suggests that parties in future actions (or even this one) can assert the most fanciful version of events and expect courts to rubber-stamp even absurd conclusions.Americans are already confronted by elected officials and candidates for office in the executive and legislative branches whose grasp of the truth often seems shaky. The moment the judiciary abandons its own commitment to truth will be a sad day for our democracy, and the majority’s opinion comes precariously close to doing this.As Judge Rakoff stated in his opinion, “An application of judicial power that does not rest on facts is worse than mindless, it is inherently dangerous.”The judiciary must always be mindful that it serves a public function and ultimately exists to serve the citizenry — not just the parties who appear before it. While I concede that the purpose of a settlement isn’t to establish the truth of every matter in dispute, at least some facts may go a long way toward dispelling public suspicion that another Wall Street bank is getting off easy. Or that the government is shaking down banks that can’t sustain the damage to their reputations of being accused of fraud, even if they are innocent.I would remand the case to Judge Rakoff for further proceedings to determine a set of facts, agreed to by the parties, that in his judgment is sufficient to determine the fairness of the settlement.■There’s little chance Judge Rakoff will appeal the ruling. But several similar cases, including one in Wisconsin and another in Texas, are working their way through the appeals process. Perhaps other courts will find a way to address the serious issues the Second Circuit seems to have ignored.