FRONT PAGEAn article on Wednesday about JPMorgan Chase’s ability to withstand $20 billion in penalties to settle a barrage of government legal actions gave an incorrect comparison of the penalties paid by the bank and the payroll of the New York Yankees. That amount could finance the team’s payroll for 100 years, not for 10.•An article on Wednesday about a Texas woman kept on life support because she was pregnant misspelled the given name of a lawyer and bioethicist at Drexel University who discussed the ethics of the hospital’s decision. She is Katherine A. Taylor, not Katharine.INTERNATIONALThe Leguama Journal article on Wednesday, about the uncertain future of tens of thousands of Ethiopians who had migrated to Saudi Arabia but were deported as part of a Saudi nationalization program, misstated the year in which nearly a million people who had entered Saudi Arabia illegally were expelled, according to the International Labor Organization. It was 2013, not this year.NATIONALAn article on Dec. 19 about food stamp fraud misstated the percent of total loss because of trafficking, lying on applications and erroneous payments to recipients. It is 4.07 percent, not 4.7.•Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about Asian carp invading the Great Lakes described a fluke incorrectly. It is a flatfish, not a flathead fish.BUSINESS DAYAn article on Wednesday about a new biography of Roger Ailes, chairman of Fox News Channel, misidentified the company’s parent company in some editions. It is 21st Century Fox, not News Corporation. The article also misidentified, in some copies, the organization that the television producer Randi Harrison was preparing to join while negotiating her salary with Mr. Ailes. It is NBC, not CNBC.•An article on Wednesday about a lawmaker’s plan to introduce a bill altering the financial regulation known as the Volcker Rule misstated the loss that Zions Bank estimated it would need to post because of the rule. It is $387 million after taxes, not $387 million before taxes.THE ARTSAn article on Wednesday about the solo show “The Surrender” at the Clurman Theater in Manhattan, starring Laura Campbell, misspelled the surname of the actress who originated the role when the show was presented in Madrid and Edinburgh. She is Isabelle Stoffel, not Stofell.•A critic’s notebook article on Monday about the Vienna Philharmonic’s New Year’s concerts, which were surrounded by turmoil last year because of new revelations about the orchestra’s ties to Nazi officials, misspelled part of the title of a 1992 book about the orchestra by Clemens Hellsberg that detailed some of the Nazi connections. It is “Demokratie der Könige” (“Democracy of Kings”), not “Democratie der Könige.”HOMEA report on the Currents page last Thursday about wallpaper by John Derian for Studio Printworks misstated the price of the wallpaper. It is $45 a yard, not $45 a foot.STYLEAn article on Dec. 26 about the romance of Prince Harry and Cressida Bonas and the press speculation about a possible engagement referred incorrectly to Sarah Ferguson. Although she lost the honorific Her Royal Highness after her divorce from Prince Andrew in 1996, she is still known formally as Sarah, Duchess of York; she is not a former duchess.•An article last Thursday about the ways in which several news anchors, most recently, Robin Roberts, have made public their sexual orientation misstated part of the name of the organization to which Thomas Roberts was giving a speech when he announced he was gay. It is the National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association, not the National Gay and Lesbian Journalists Association.•A report in the Browsing column last Thursday misspelled the given name of the owner of Electric Nest, a boutique in Brooklyn. She is Leana Zuniga, not Liana Zuniga. The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.