When John B. King Jr. was named New York State’s education commissioner in 2011, it was not an especially high-wattage position, and he was not a controversial choice.Three and a half years later, he is set to leave a job where he has been at the center of some of the most heated debates about education in years. Whoever replaces him will occupy a now very prominent post, where he or she will have to juggle numerous contentious issues, including testing, teacher evaluation and training, and charter schools.“This is not a job for the thin-skinned,” David M. Steiner, Dr. King’s predecessor and now the dean of the Hunter College School of Education, said in an interview. “It’s very challenging, and people have very deep passions and beliefs about public education. That’s as it should be in a democracy.”Dr. Steiner, who oversaw a difficult process of negotiation with the state’s teachers’ unions on an evaluation system, praised his successor’s work and said Dr. King had faced much more widespread scrutiny.“The nature of what has happened around the country not just in New York over the Common Core and over teacher evaluations has definitely spread into a much more public debate,” he said.Dr. King, 39, said on Wednesday that he was leaving to become a senior adviser to the federal education secretary, Arne Duncan. He will be legally delegated the duties of the deputy secretary, a spokeswoman for the department, Dorie Turner Nolt, said, adding that the department hoped President Obama would ultimately nominate him for that role. The deputy position, however, requires Senate confirmation, and with Republicans’ taking control of the chamber next month, the president is likely to have a tougher time getting his appointments approved.When Dr. King was appointed education commissioner, it had been less than a year since New York had signed on to the Common Core, a set of national standards for what students should be able to do in each grade. More than 40 states had adopted the standards, and they were widely embraced, by Republicans and Democrats alike.New York became one of the first states to administer tests aligned to the Common Core standards. They were much harder than the old tests, and test scores plummeted, including in wealthy suburbs, alarming parents. The state also rolled out a new teacher evaluation system, in which a portion of a teacher’s rating is based on students’ growth on the tests. Many teachers have said they were not given enough time to adjust to the new standards and have criticized the ratings as flawed.Around the country, conservatives have turned against the Common Core standards, and several states have withdrawn from them.At forums across the state, teachers and parents expressed outrage at Dr. King, who was unwavering in his defense of the tests. After a forum near Poughkeepsie, where he was drowned out by the crowd, he canceled several other planned forums, then rescheduled them. This year the state teachers’ union called for his resignation.Some reform advocates are concerned that the 17-member Board of Regents will replace Dr. King with someone who will slow down the pace of changes. Six Regents are up for re-election by the State Legislature in March. This year, candidates under consideration for four Regents positions faced an unusually intense interrogation about their views on the Common Core standards, testing and teacher evaluations. There has been no movement to withdraw from the Common Core, but legislators have passed moratoriums protecting students and teachers from having low scores dictate promotion or employment decisions.Andy Smarick, a senior fellow at the Thomas B. Fordham Institute, a conservative policy group that has supported the Common Core, said that across the country, reformist state commissioners were being replaced with consensus candidates — often superintendents who were well known and well liked by the various interest groups in the state.“Everything that I’m seeing in New York kind of suggests that lots of people in power would just prefer for there to be less controversy,” Mr. Smarick said, adding, “If I were a betting man, I would say that the next leader is going to be noncontroversial and probably from within the state, a known commodity.”The chancellor of the Board of Regents, Merryl H. Tisch, however, vowed that the Regents would not retreat from either the standards or the testing regimen.“This has been a very complicated two or three years across the state, and the changes are very difficult, but they’re changes we believe ultimately are necessary,” she said.Another regent, Roger B. Tilles, said he hoped that having a new commissioner would offer a chance for a reset in the public debate.“This will give an opportunity, perhaps, to be able to have everybody take a deep breath,” he said. Dr. King “became somewhat of a lightning rod, and people weren’t willing to listen any more, and I think that that created a problem for him.”