SEOUL, South Korea — President Park Geun-hye of South Korea vowed on Monday to disband her country’s coast guard, saying that South Korea owed “reform and a great transformation” to hundreds of high school students who died in a ferry disaster last month.Bowing deeply, Ms. Park offered a “heartfelt apology” for having failed to prevent the sinking of the ferry, the Sewol, on April 16 and for the coast guard’s bungling of rescue operations.“The ultimate responsibility lies with me, the president,” she said.Although she had apologized a few times over the sinking, Ms. Park’s nationally televised speech on Monday was her clearest expression of public contrition. As of Monday, 286 people had been confirmed dead, with 18 missing, making the episode one of the country’s worst peacetime disasters. It has also developed into Ms. Park’s biggest political crisis; over the weekend, the police detained more than 200 people who had tried to march on her office, calling on her to step down.On Monday, the main opposition party, the New Politics Alliance for Democracy, described Ms. Park’s decision to dismantle the coast guard as “shock therapy” designed to divert attention from her office’s failure to deal effectively with the disaster. It demanded the appointment of independent investigators to look more broadly into her government’s failures.Ms. Park defended her reorganization plan. “We failed to save those students who should have been saved,” she said. “I will make this an opportunity for South Korea to be born again.”She promised to disband the coast guard and overhaul her government to help it deal more efficiently with disasters. The vast majority of the dead and missing were students trapped in the dangerously listing ferry after its crew repeatedly urged them to stay put.According to the transcripts of coast guard radio communications released over the weekend, the first coast guard boats to arrive at the scene on April 16 were repeatedly ordered to try to reach the passengers trapped inside. But they responded that the ferry was too heavily tilted for their officers to board it. They only saved the ship’s captain and other crew members who were deserting the ship, and those passengers who fled the ship on their own.The coast guard “didn’t do its duty,” Ms. Park said. “If it had tried to rescue people more swiftly and more actively right after the accident, it could have greatly reduced the casualties.”The duties of the coast guard will be absorbed into the national police force or into a new safety agency that Ms. Park said she would create to ensure that disasters are handled better. The new agency will also incorporate disaster response duties currently scattered throughout various government agencies.Toward the end of the speech, Ms. Park turned emotional, struggling to fight back tears, as she cited the names of those she called “true heroes”: students, crew members and teachers who survivors said helped passengers escape but did not make it out themselves.“The sinking of the Sewol will stay as a hard-to-erase scar in our history,” Ms. Park said. “It’s the duty of the living to make reform and a great transformation for the country so that the sacrifices of the dead were not wasted. If we cannot reform ourselves in a situation like this, we will become a nation that will never be able to achieve reform.”With that, she declared a war against what she called her country’s deeply entrenched culture of “kkiri kkiri,” or collusive ties between businesses and government regulators, that she said had led to lax regulatory enforcement and an easy acceptance of poor safety standards throughout society.Investigators of the ferry sinking say that a culture of corruption contributed to the disaster. The operator of the ferry renovated the old ship to increase its passenger capacity. The ferry was overloaded with cargo that was poorly secured, and officials lied about it in its departure report. Yet it was ruled safe to sail by the Korea Shipping Association, a lobby group for the industry that was also in charge of inspecting ships for safety. Central government officials were accused of failing to supervise the association, where their former colleagues and bosses found high-ranking jobs.Critics have said that virtually all industries in the country are plagued by what Ms. Park called a “bureaucratic mafia”: government officials taking cushy jobs in the industries they used to regulate. Retiring government officials have traditionally considered such jobs their rightful perks and often worked to shield the industries from regulators. To break the collusive links, Ms. Park said she would revise laws to tighten the screening of officials looking for industry-affiliated jobs after retirement.She also called for the revision of the criminal code to drastically increase punishments for those who endanger the lives of many people. She said the decision by the Sewol’s captain and crew to flee ahead of passengers was “like an act of murder.”Ms. Park said she would send bills to the National Assembly to make the changes she proposed.The main opposition said it would selectively support Ms. Park’s proposed laws, including a bill on conflict of interest for government officials that would, among other things, crack down on their practice of taking gifts. Businesses have long abused the country’s tradition of exchanging gifts during holidays and anniversaries to bribe government officials and politicians.Ms. Park also proposed a special law to allow the government to search and confiscate the assets of Chonghaejin Marine Company, the operator of the ferry, and the family that holds stakes in it. In memory of the dead, she said she would designate April 16 as National Safety Day.