THE POST-POST-APOCALYPTIC DETROITParts of Detroit are indeed on the rise, and they are increasingly populated by young, white, college-educated people with varying levels of understanding of how Detroit came to its current state. Even so, there is a black middle class in Detroit, whose children eat their vegetables and do their homework. Those people have been here, will be here and will be the bedrock of any revitalization. The city’s rebirth will also include the much-maligned core of activists who insist that low-income people deserve a voice in the city’s future. Unfortunately both of these groups are often missing in the media narrative. KIM HUNTER, Detroit, posted on nytimes.com I have lived in downtown Detroit since 1965 and have worked in the city all my adult life, and I believe something is going on — something good. Downtown and in the Midtown area, things are hopping in a totally new way. It is more than bricks and mortar; there is a new mood in the city that seems to be fueling investment. Of course, there is still a problem with unpopulated land in a city that was originally built to house nearly two million people, but as it says on our city flag, I believe we “will rise from the ashes,” and I continue to hope for “better things” to come. SHARON TEVIS FINCH, Detroit, posted on nytimes.comIf Detroit becomes an exporter again, then all other great things, like coffee shops, culture and street life, will grow naturally. But so far, it seems as if Detroit has regained only some light manufacturing, some seed money and residents who drive to the suburbs to work. Seattle, once a rough, hardscrabble city, experienced significant economic growth because of Microsoft and Boeing. Pittsburgh’s revival was aided by its world-class medical centers. I’m glad to read about optimism amid decay in Detroit, but what I really hope to hear about are companies moving in that have something to offer to people outside Detroit. MARK S. SILLMAN, Ann Arbor, Mich., posted on nytimes.comTHE LOVE LETTERS of WARREN G. HARDING Harding’s letters are sensational and shocking — of that there can be no doubt — but I hope that readers will understand they were never meant to be seen by the general public. Though he eventually became president of the United States, he wrote many of the letters during a time when most people would expect their privacy to be honored. Indeed, some of the steamiest letters were written while he was a private citizen.The sensational nature of the letters can easily mask the deeper issues beneath this love story. Carrie Phillips was pro-German at a time when many people in this country were pro-German. Her views represented the views of many of the Ohioans represented by Harding in the Senate. Even though he knew it would destroy his relationship with Carrie and potentially mean his own political suicide, Harding decided to vote for war. But he did not vote for war to make the world “safe for democracy.” In fact, he told the Senate that he thought it was not our place to tell another sovereign nation what form of government it should have. This is a lesson that continues to be relevant today, even as we witness the tragedy in Iraq.Harding and his presidency deserve another look, not because he wrote steamy love letters but because he thought deeply about the issues of his day in a way that remains pertinent to us. JAMES D. ROBENALT, author of “The Harding Affair: Love and Espionage During the Great War,” ClevelandTHE MYSTERY OF THE VANISHING SCREWBALLIn the ’60s, I threw the screwball, along with four other pitches, to compensate for being an ectomorph in a world of physically superior mesomorphs. In fact, I gripped the ball differently than described in this article because of my relatively small hands. My index and forefingers were on the left side of the seams, where they narrow, and most of the pressure came from the middle finger as I released the ball while snapping my wrist clockwise. This article was a joy to read, and it reminded me of a time when my dreams had not yet been dashed by the reality of my physical limitations. RONALD KING, Kennewick, Wash., posted on nytimes.com