KABUL, Afghanistan —  The runner-up in Afghanistan’s bitterly disputed presidential election, Abdullah Abdullah, struck a conciliatory note toward President-elect Ashraf Ghani in a speech on Thursday in which he confirmed that he would join the government as its chief executive officer.Mr. Abdullah’s public address, his first since signing an American-brokered deal on Sunday to end months of political deadlock, cleared up the ambiguity about his future role. And it was an open attempt to bring his supporters on board with a unity government amid worries that they might rebel against an administration led by Mr. Ghani.The political deal gave Mr. Abdullah the power to nominate the new chief executive officer — a post with powers roughly equivalent to a prime minister — but did not specify who would fill the position. There had been some speculation that Mr. Abdullah might name one of his supporters to the post so he could remain free to operate as a political opposition leader. But on Thursday, he was introduced as “the chief executive.”In his speech, Mr. Abdullah offered congratulations to Mr. Ghani as Afghanistan’s “future president.” But the words drew a silent response from thousands of supporters who had gathered at a large hall in Kabul.In answer to a question, Mr. Abdullah asserted that he had little choice but to sign a deal with Mr. Ghani. “Remember that it’s very easy to resort to violence, but it has bad consequences,” he said.His supporters, many of whom waved Afghan flags, were more cheered by his promises for the incoming government, which he said would be “keenly at the service of all Afghan people.”But while Mr. Abdullah promised to revitalize the ailing economy, which has been further weakened by the political crisis, he made no mention of possible peace talks with the Taliban, exposing a point of contention with Mr. Ghani.As the winter draws near, the Taliban can celebrate one of their best fighting seasons in a decade. Mr. Ghani, an ethnic Pashtun, favors ending the conflict through peace talks, but Mr. Abdullah, who draws his support from largely non-Pashtun areas, has been more skeptical about negotiations with the insurgents.Outside the hall, Mr. Abdullah’s supporters appeared to be torn between indignation that their candidate had lost and relief that a destabilizing political battle had reached a peaceful resolution — at least for now.“He is not a legitimate president,” said Muhammad Yousaf, a 20-year-old student, referring to Mr. Ghani. But, he added, “there was no other solution. Otherwise, the country would have fallen into crisis.”Mr. Abdullah acknowledged that the crisis had battered Afghans’ faith in their nascent democracy.“I have not forgotten those people who lost their lives, their fingers, when they voted,” he said, in reference to voters who had a finger cut off by the Taliban because it was stained with ink that indicated they had voted. “I hold the pain and sorrow of those families in my heart.”Mr. Abdullah and Mr. Ghani face a stark array of challenges after the inauguration ceremony, which is scheduled for Monday. The economy has taken a pounding as a result of the political deadlock, and the government says that it lacks almost $900 million to pay civil servants in Kabul next month — a gap that is likely to be filled by reluctant Western donors.First, though, the new government is set to sign a bilateral security agreement to determine the shape and size of the American military presence. After protracted and tense negotiations with American officials last year, the departing president, Hamid Karzai, refused to sign the deal, saying it would be left to his successor.Both Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah support the troop agreement, and a senior State Department official told reporters that the deal would most likely be signed within days of the inauguration.Security has been tightened in the capital in anticipation of possible Taliban attacks on the inauguration ceremony. In a reminder of growing insecurity in the north of the country, an explosion near a police checkpoint in Faryab Province on Thursday killed one civilian and wounded 10 others, the local police said.