WASHINGTON —  With a financial catastrophe unfurling alongside its political transition, Ukraine is in desperate need of billions of dollars — and quickly. Its economy is shrinking. Its government treasury is empty. Its foreign-exchange funds are low. And its banking system is fragile.That has left policy makers in Brussels and Washington rushing to prepare a financial rescue package for the country, with the International Monetary Fund planning to take the lead on a package that will almost certainly include tens of billions of dollars of new loans.But international lenders’ hands are tied until the country has a transitional government in place, officials said. Even once the money is flowing, a lending program is likely to be accompanied by demands for a necessary but bitter pill of government cutbacks, higher energy costs and structural changes that previous Ukrainian governments found impossible to swallow.Western officials are well aware that a rescue package will be necessary to stave off an absolute financial collapse — and thus to help ensure the success of the political transition already underway. But they also worry that the standard prescriptions for economic overhaul risk sending Ukraine into even worse turmoil and that the nascent government might not be able to deliver.“This is not simple arithmetic,” said Douglas A. Rediker, a former American official at the I.M.F.American officials said it was important that the assistance be substantial. On Wednesday, Secretary of State John Kerry told reporters that Obama administration officials had been discussing a separate package of assistance that would complement the I.M.F.’s efforts.“Personally, I don’t think it is enough for us to be heralding the advent of democracy and to applaud the courage and conviction of the people who brought about this transition and then just not do anything,” he said. “I think that is unconscionable.”According to the plans, which have yet to be formally decided by the White House, the United States would provide $1 billion in loan guarantees. Mr. Kerry said that administration officials were also considering a direct cash infusion to Ukraine. He said that he had just talked to Senator John McCain, the leading Republican on the Foreign Relations Committee, about a potential aid effort but that it was not clear how large a package of direct aid Congress would support.“We are formulating initially a $1 billion loan guarantee,” Mr. Kerry said, “but we are also looking at the possibility of additional assistance.”The pathway to a more substantial aid package is fraught with hurdles. It is unclear how bad Ukraine’s books have gotten. A government needs to be put in place that is prepared to request an I.M.F. package. And it will be asked to agree to tough economic conditions that are likely to prove deeply unpopular with Ukrainians already suffering from economic and political instability.“We need to have somebody to talk to, O.K.?” said Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the I.M.F., answering questions about Ukraine from journalists last weekend in Sydney, Australia. “Any discussion takes two.”Once that happens, any package needs to be “owned by the authorities, by the people, because at the end of the day it will be the future of the Ukrainian economy,” Ms. Lagarde said. “There are economic reforms that we all know need to be started.”Policy makers are already hotly debating a rescue package for Ukraine, with conversations about the economy dominating discussions on the sidelines of the Group of 20 meeting of economic officials in Sydney.The country’s finances are now “on the verge of collapse,” the Washington-based Institute of International Finance, which represents major banks around the world, warned in a report released this week.“With the authorities mostly preoccupied with handling the political upheaval, economic policies have remained in limbo,” said Ondrej Schneider and Lubomir Mitov of the finance institute. “Risks of prolonged political uncertainty still remain substantial, however, raising odds of delays in implementing reforms with potentially disastrous consequences for financial stability and growth.”A Treasury official — speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss diplomatically fragile matters — said that there was significant good will toward Ukraine among international officials and an acknowledgment that an emergency program needed to come quickly. But the official said that an I.M.F. program — including a careful assessment of the country’s financial state and a commitment by Ukraine to economic overhaul — must be the priority.The fund, before lending, will take a thorough accounting of Ukraine’s finances, especially given concerns that previous governments have been less than honest about its books.“Someone had to pay for those ostriches,” said Mr. Rediker, referring to the zoo found at the compound of Viktor F. Yanukovych, the ousted president.Analysts said they expected Ukraine to require a package of about $10 billion to $20 billion in short-term lending, with the possibility of more next year. That lending would allow the new government to run a fiscal deficit without having to finance itself on the punishing international bond markets.“We will be ready to engage, ready to help,” Ms. Lagarde said this weekend. “We, of course, try to go further and play the catalytic role that the I.M.F. typically plays in such situations.”The I.M.F. is expected to insist that Ukraine raise domestic gas prices, cut government spending, tackle corruption and allow the country’s currency to float on the international markets.Until a full package can be delivered, individual countries in the European Union, as well as the United States, might be able to provide temporary support. Catherine Ashton, the European Union’s top foreign policy official, has offered support without giving any specifics or numbers.Opposition leaders have signaled their support for substantive changes.“The popular demand is radical,” said Anders Aslund, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. “The public sector has been working for the enrichment of the elites, and the old tricks need to be done away with.”The prime minister of Georgia, Irakli Garibashvili, who met with Mr. Kerry on Wednesday, also emphasized the need for the West to move quickly to support Ukraine’s transition.“I think the European Union, together with I.M.F. and with other international institutions, should find a solution now to solve their problems,” he said in an interview. “I think they should be very flexible.”In 2010, the I.M.F. had offered to lend to Ukraine, only to pull back when it found the government unable or unwilling to follow through on its commitments. That experience is likely to limit the fund’s flexibility, leading it to require shorter disbursements with more conditions attached, analysts said.“There are those who say, ‘Throw money at them! They’re the good guys!’ ” said Mr. Rediker, now with the Peterson Institute. “But that’s not how the I.M.F. works.”