For a few moments during President Obama’s State of the Union address on Tuesday evening, he sounded as if he was channeling Secretary of State John Kerry.American diplomacy, Mr. Obama said, had yielded a plan to remove Syria’s chemical weapons, brokered peace talks between the Israelis and Palestinians, and produced an interim deal with Iran on its nuclear program that he said “rolled parts of that program back.”“In a world of complex threats,” he said, “our security, our leadership depends on all elements of our power — including strong and principled diplomacy.”Four days earlier, at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, Mr. Kerry laid out the same ambitious agenda. “Far from disengaging,” he declared, “America is proud to be more engaged than ever.”In some ways, it makes perfect sense that the president would borrow from the script of his chief diplomat. Mr. Kerry has become the energetic face of Mr. Obama’s foreign policy, conducting high-wire diplomacy on multiple fronts.But it may be harder for Mr. Obama to rebut suggestions that he has become disengaged from the world — a story line that has gained currency in recent months with his reluctance to intervene militarily in Syria, with the lower profile his administration has taken with Arab allies like Egypt, and even with events out of his control, like his cancellation of a trip to Asia last fall because of the government shutdown.Mr. Obama’s remarks came in a domestically focused speech that laid bare a nation retrenching. The only guaranteed foreign-policy milestone of 2014, he said, would be to complete America’s military withdrawal from Afghanistan — an exit that might become an evacuation if President Hamid Karzai’s refusal to sign a security agreement prompts the White House to deliver on a threat to pull out even a residual force.Certainly, the president made a robust case that aggressive diplomacy had replaced military might as the principal tool of American engagement in the world. Defending his talks with Iran against critics on Capitol Hill, Mr. Obama said diplomacy had resulted in the first deal in a decade that halted, and in some cases scaled back, Iran’s nuclear program.The risk-taking and ambition of the president’s diplomatic gambles stand in stark contrast to the small-ball nature of his domestic initiatives. While some or all of these negotiations might yet fail, Mr. Obama said, diplomacy deserves the chance to succeed.“If John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan could negotiate with the Soviet Union,” he said, “then surely a strong and confident America can negotiate with less powerful adversaries today.”There were obvious differences between the State of the Union and Mr. Kerry’s speech in Davos, starting with the fact that Mr. Kerry was speaking to a rarefied audience of corporate jet-setters in the thin air of the Swiss Alps; Mr. Obama, to an assembly of partisan lawmakers in the thick political atmosphere of the Capitol.While the secretary of state laid out an activist agenda to an audience hungry for more American involvement, his boss reassured a skeptical Congress that he would continue to bring troops home from Afghanistan, as part of a broader effort to remove the United States from the permanent war footing of the decade after the Sept. 11 attacks.While Mr. Kerry made a detailed, passionate case for an Israeli-Palestinian peace accord and the removal of President Bashar al-Assad in Syria, Mr. Obama touched only briefly on those issues, making no mention of Mr. Assad, whose exit he demanded more than two years ago. Nor did he mention Egypt, once a core American ally in the Middle East.Mr. Obama punctuated his case for diplomacy with Iran by reiterating a threat to the Senate — if lawmakers pass new sanctions against Iran during the coming negotiations, he will veto the bill. So far, the bill’s sponsors have gained 59 senators, including 16 Democrats, leaving them shy of a veto-proof majority.“If Iran’s leaders do not seize this opportunity, then I will be the first to call for new sanctions,” the president said, adding that he reserved all options to prevent the Iranians from getting a bomb. “But if Iran’s leaders do seize the chance,” he said, “we will have resolved one of the leading security risks of our time without the risks of war.”Mr. Obama will have other ways to demonstrate his engagement. After a long period of being homebound — with the exception of a quick trip to South Africa for the funeral of Nelson Mandela — he will travel to Mexico, Europe and Asia in the next three months.In Davos, where the water-cooler chatter was about America’s waning influence in the Middle East, Mr. Kerry suggested his own travel schedule should belie those arguments.“This misperception,” he said, “appears to be based on the simplistic assumption that our only tool of influence is our military, and that if we don’t have a huge troop presence somewhere or we aren’t brandishing an immediate threat of force, we are somehow absent from the arena.”In the House chamber, Mr. Obama did not bother to address foreign misgivings about America’s role. The United States, he said, remains a force for good worldwide — nurturing democracy in Myanmar and Tunisia, opposing efforts to stifle protesters in Ukraine, and bringing electricity to impoverished villages in Africa.Yet for all the talk of America’s far-flung engagements, Mr. Obama, like Mr. Kerry, found it difficult to range much beyond the Middle East. The president, who two years ago sought to shift the focus of his foreign policy to Asia, barely mentioned that region in his speech, and did so largely in the context of the relief effort after the typhoon in the Philippines.As Mr. Obama enters the stretch of his presidency where foreign policy historically takes center stage, he is putting a spotlight squarely on diplomacy. But he is still struggling to extricate the United States from a turbulent region that has consumed its efforts for decades.