Welcome to the Morning Briefing on NYT Now, the new app from The New York Times. (Download us for iPhone.)The briefing goes live at 6 a.m. to help you get ready for your day.Here’s what you need to know for Monday:• Deadly Midwestern storms poised to strike again.The death toll was revised to 15, and the Arkansas governor’s office also reported “widespread injuries” after tornadoes hit near Little Rock on Sunday.The National Weather Service warned of more severe storms for today in Alabama, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi and Tennessee.• More punishment for Russia over Ukraine.President Obama, in the Philippines on the last stop of his Asian tour, said today the United States will impose new sanctions on Russia.In Brussels today, European Union diplomats are also expected to announce restrictions on Moscow.• Another mass death sentence in Egypt.A judge in Egypt sentenced 683 people, including the leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, to death. They were charged in an attack on a police station last year.He also reversed all but 37 of the 529 death sentences from a similar case in March, commuting them to life imprisonment.• Outrage over basketball team owner.The N.B.A. may issue its response today to racially charged remarks attributed to the Los Angeles Clippers owner Donald Sterling.The Clippers wore their warm-up jerseys inside out in protest Sunday before the Golden State Warriors won to tie their first-round playoff series in Oakland, Calif.Update: The N.B.A. scheduled a news conference for Tuesday to discuss its position.• A congressman’s indictment.Representative Michael G. Grimm, a New York Republican, surrendered to the authorities this morning to face fraud charges related to a restaurant he owned.Mr. Grimm, who has been under investigation for more than two years, says the indictment is politically motivated.• A mother returns to court in Utah.Megan Huntsman, who admitted to police to strangling or suffocating six of her newborn infants to death from 1996 to 2006, is expected to be formally charged with six counts of murder today.Update: Prosecutors accused her of first-degree murder in a brief courtroom hearing in Provo.MARKETS• Wall Street  stocks are lower in choppy trading. European shares ended ahead, but Asian indexes closed sharply lower.• Pfizer, the American pharmaceutical giant, is weighing its options today after the British drugmaker AstraZeneca declines its overture for talks toward what could be a $100 billion merger.Update: Ian Read, Pfizer chief executive, said the New York-based company had “preliminary discussions” with the British government about the deal today.• Jeffrey Immelt, the chief executive of General Electric, meets with the French president in Paris today to make his case for buying the energy arm of Alstom, one of Europe’s biggest industrial companies.But so does the chief executive of Siemens of Germany, another interested bidder.Update: Mr. Immelt said after his meeting that “the dialogue was open, friendly and productive.”NOTEWORTHY• A show all his own.At 87, Mel Brooks makes his solo show debut at the Geffen Playhouse in Los Angeles tonight with a one-night-only performance billed as an “introspective retrospective” of the life of the director, actor and comedian.• Willie Nelson, martial artist.The country singer-songwriter, who turns 81 this week, receives his fifth-degree black belt in a Korean martial art today in Texas.• On The Times’s best-selling books lists.“The Collector,” the latest offering from Nora Roberts, debuts at No. 1 in hardcover fiction books. “The Goldfinch,” which won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction this month, returns to No. 2.In hardcover nonfiction, “Players First,” by John Calipari, the Kentucky basketball coach who led his team to the N.C.A.A. championship game this month, arrives at No. 3.• A bachelor no more?George Clooney, who maintained he would remain single after a previous failed marriage over 20 years ago, is said to be engaged to Amal Alamuddin, a British lawyer.She is one of the lawyers representing Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder, in his extradition fight against Sweden.OVER THE WEEKEND• “The Other Woman,” with $24 million in sales, ousted “Captain America: The Winter Soldier” from its three-week stay atop the domestic movie box office this weekend.• Pope Francis canonized John XXIII and John Paul II, two of his predecessors, in front of an estimated 800,000 worshipers in Vatican City on Sunday. It was the first time that two popes were elevated to the sainthood at the same time.BACK STORYOn Wednesday, Iraq holds its first national election since American soldiers left there at the end of 2011.But that doesn’t mean that the war-torn country is becoming a stable democracy.Violence still permeates the country. More than 2,000 civilians have been killed this year through March, the United Nations says.Militants control Falluja and other areas of Anbar, the largest province. There will be no voting in those areas.Amid the unrest and bloodshed, more than 9,000 candidates are running for 328 parliamentary seats. Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki is seeking a third consecutive four-year term.If no party wins a majority, the rest of the year could be spent in negotiations to form a coalition government, continuing the instability.Victoria Shannon and Rick Rojas contributed reporting.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m.Don’t miss Your Evening Briefing at 6 p.m.What would you like to see here? Email us at NYTNow@NYTimes.com.Follow us on Twitter: @NYTNow.