Brent Roske lives on a 45-foot yacht off the coast of Marina del Rey, which is technically on the Pacific Ocean, but for jurisdictional purposes is considered part of the city of Los Angeles and, more to the point, the 33rd Congressional District of California. In January, Henry Waxman, the liberal stalwart who has represented the district with little resistance since the year after Roske was born, announced that he would not seek re-election. Now Roske, who is 39, is part of a field of 18 candidates hoping to represent the heartland of Beverly Hills, Malibu and Bel-Air in the United States Congress.A former creative director at NBC Universal, Roske is not without assets. He is the producer of a web series called “Chasing the Hill,” which chronicles the campaign of a fictional Democratic congresswoman. He also has support from the White House — or at least the soundstage White House of “The West Wing.” Richard Schiff, who played Toby on the series, has a big role in “Chasing the Hill” and is a Roske friend. So is David Hasselhoff, who played the governor of California on the web series. Should Roske get elected, he already has some bold ideas. He plans, for instance, to hire a film crew to document his every move in office. “People have a right,” he says, “to know what their elected representatives are doing.”Roske describes Waxman as “an honorable man,” but one whose extended status in D.C. has meant that he “no longer really represents the people.” This raises the question of what it means to represent “the people” in America’s second-wealthiest congressional district. (It trails only the 12th District of New York, which includes parts of the East Side of Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens.) California 33 is, after all, home to what might be the highest per capita population of political dilettantes, “creative activists,” foreign-policy hobbyists and flush Democratic donors in the nation, not to mention large numbers of people who like to tell you about their good friends Bill and Hillary. (And how they were just talking to Bill the other day, in fact, and stay tuned for who they think Hillary’s running mate will be.)News of Waxman’s departure unleashed a kind of political anarchy on the Botox Belt. “When you represent a district for 40 years, it does tend to produce pent-up demand,” Waxman told me. Initially, fantasies were spun about celebrity candidates jumping into the race and vying “Survivor”-style for the privilege of serving in the People’s Chamber. Roll Call, the Capitol Hill publication, put out a call via Twitter for the likes of Courteney Cox, Danny DeVito and Betty White, as well as a roster of other A-through-C-listers. Ricki Lake and Richard Simmons replied — to say no. Lorenzo Lamas came back with a maybe.Even so, the existing field reflects the vibrant collection of humanity that resides in California 33. Some are serious candidates, some not — three Republicans, three Independents, one Green, one Libertarian, the rest Democrats. You’ve most likely not heard of any of them except Marianne Williamson, the self-help guru, who dislikes being called a “self-help guru.” (Her spokesman has suggested the term “thought leader.”) Williamson has spoken of turning our political dialogue into “a conversation of the heart.” Katy Perry shows up at her events, as do multiple Kardashians. Kim officially endorsed her in a blog post just before press time. Williamson also received the support of Alanis Morissette, Nicole Richie and, for added sex appeal, Dennis Kucinich.The more conventional candidates include Matt Miller, a Clinton White House alumnus and author who co-hosts a popular talk show on the public-radio station KCRW (and had a cameo appearance as a D.C. pundit in the Denzel Washington movie “The Siege”); and Barbara Mulvaney, a former State Department official who was the senior prosecutor for the United Nations International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The Republican Elan Carr is a prosecutor and an Iraq War veteran and the president — or “Supreme Master” — of the Jewish fraternity Alpha Epsilon Pi. (If you want a congressman who led a Hanukkah service in Saddam Hussein’s former palace, he is your man.) Then there are the favorites: the former Los Angeles controller Wendy Greuel, who was the runner-up in last year’s L.A. mayor’s race and is backed by Emily’s List, the political-action committee, as well as by Ed Begley Jr. and Rob Reiner; and Ted Lieu, a California state senator and lieutenant colonel in the U.S. Air Force Reserves, who emigrated from Taiwan as a child, lived in a basement apartment in Cleveland and helped his parents hawk jewelry as a child.None of them, however, are enjoying themselves as much as Brent Roske. I met him last month at a diner in West Hollywood. He ordered a meatloaf sandwich, and after a few minutes, Richard Schiff showed up. I wanted to call him Toby — because he is Toby, basically, self-serious, intense and irritable. A group of about a dozen schoolchildren filed into the diner for milkshakes. One had a distinctive, shrieking laugh, which kept making Schiff jump slightly in his chair. “I almost shot that kid right in the head,” he said at one point. “This is why we shouldn’t have a gun culture, because I would have shot him.”Schiff has many opinions about politics, which we were obligated to hear because he once worked in a TV White House. At one point he said that people from the Obama campaign told him how much “The West Wing” inspired them to get into politics. I don’t doubt this, as Washington is filled with operatives who routinely quote lines from the show and have come to mimic the characters’ fast-talking mannerisms and heady sense that they are always shaping history. “I came to the conclusion that without ‘The West Wing’ — ” Schiff said, then slightly changed gears. “I don’t think Obama — ” He seemed to be struggling for a way to credit the show he was on with the Obama’s election. By contrast, today’s political productions, like “House of Cards,” are darker shows for darker times. Schiff joked that people probably “go up to Kevin Spacey and say, you’re the reason I decided not to” get into politics.The opinions of people in California 33 are, of course, more valuable than those of, say, Indiana 9. Or at least they have paid for that belief. “Politicians come here from all over the country and use us as an A.T.M.,” Wendy Greuel told me, referring to the never-ending fund-raising bazaar — largely for Democrats — that is this district. We were eating lunch at Nate ’n Al’s, the Jewish deli in Beverly Hills that is favored by studio heads and agents and claims to have the best matzo-ball soup in Los Angeles. Greuel, who went with the chili, is a former executive at DreamWorks. Being home to such a creative, famous and rich population, she suggested, entitles California 33 to special care and attention. “We need to make sure that our national leaders know that if we’re going to support them, they need to support us,” Greuel said — by which she seemed to suggest that someone needed to give voice to the poor and exploited citizens of fantasy land. I later mentioned this notion to Representative George Miller, a longtime Democratic congressman from Northern California who is also retiring this year. Miller chuckled. “These people have more voice than anybody in America,” he said.Miller was elected to Congress in 1974, the same year as Waxman, as part of a Democratic wave that followed Richard Nixon’s resignation that summer. The so-called Watergate babies — 75 new Democrats, half of them under 40 — came to represent a generation of reform-minded policy makers, generally liberal and collectively determined to upend the ossified traditions and sensibilities of Congress. Miller and Waxman will be the last of the true Watergate litter to leave the House. (Rick Nolan, who represented the Sixth Congressional District of Minnesota from 1975 to 1981, was elected to the Eighth in 2012.) Patrick Leahy of Vermont remains in the Senate, along with Tom Harkin of Iowa, though he is retiring.I met with Waxman last month in the Rayburn House Office Building. His wall is clogged with copies of the landmark bills he played a big role in writing — the Clean Air Act, the Tobacco Control Act and the Affordable Care Act, among others. Waxman, who is 74, is known for using any means at his disposal to move an issue forward, writing letters he knows will be ignored, commissioning studies, demanding hearings and engaging in all manner of arduous maneuverings that will, little by little, add to the public record and build a case over years, even decades. He is thorough, tactical and relentless; “tougher than a boiled owl,” in the famous words of the former Republican senator Alan Simpson. When news of Waxman’s retirement reached a gathering of House Republicans at their annual retreat in January, it was reportedly met with a standing ovation.Though he insists he is not retiring in frustration, Waxman clearly feels some. “People here are genuinely unhappy,” he told me, “here” being the House of Representatives. “Republicans are in the majority and yet act like an aggrieved minority. Democrats are not happy because of the stupid things Republicans make us do every day.” Congress has always been difficult, he said; politics comes with multiple headaches, and making legislation is not designed to be painless. But it was easier for Waxman to abide this over the years because the rewards, when they came, were immensely satisfying — and because he also enjoyed overwhelming support in his district, being re-elected with more than 60 percent of the vote every other year since he came to Congress.But that changed in 2012, when the district was redrawn to include less-reliable Democratic areas, and Waxman was opposed by a self-funded Independent, Bill Bloomfield, who spent nearly $8 million, compared with the $2.7 million Waxman spent on his campaign. The experience was wearying, perhaps even slightly traumatic, for Waxman, who wound up winning with 54 percent of the vote. Clearly, he did not relish another campaign like that one, just to earn the right to almost certainly serve once again in the minority and be forced to keep voting against the latest effort to repeal Obamacare, as he was headed to do on this afternoon.While dogged, Waxman is typically soft-spoken, polite and not prone to any of the cable-ready histrionics that many of his colleagues have been weaned on. But on the day I met with him, I found him unusually outspoken, even occasionally disdainful. He despises what he calls the “intentional ignorance” of so many of his Republican colleagues — the silliness of what passes for political dialogue, the shallowness of the media and the need of his fellow politicians to seek attention at any cost. He referred with obvious pride to “the things on the wall behind me.” Surely, it rankles him to read actual headlines on the way out like “Richard Simmons Will Not Run for Waxman’s Seat.”When he speaks of those who have lined up to succeed him, Waxman makes the requisite mention of “some good, qualified candidates,” but he has no plans to endorse anyone before the primary election on June 3. And he is not sure he will endorse anyone after the primary either. He is amused by the naïveté of prospective members who “talk like they can just wave a magic wand” and make the problems of Washington go away. He reserves particular ridicule for Williamson and her claim that she wants to “just get people talking” in order to “heal” our politics. “She says she is going to come in here and ‘change the dialogue,’ ” Waxman said, assuming a mocking tone. “She says, ‘We’re going to talk about helping kids and protecting the food supply’ and other things. It’s as if nobody has ever thought of this before.”In recent weeks, Williamson has received an inordinate amount of press attention in national outlets. She is an exotic political animal and perfect media catnip. She also has raised more than $1 million (including $100,000 of her own), has high name recognition and enjoys an undeniable following that might just put her over the top in a low-turnout, off-year congressional election. Waxman first learned about Williamson when his colleague, Lois Capps, Democrat of Santa Barbara, was pushing her to be the House chaplain many years ago. “I even supported her,” Waxman said.I suggested to him that, had he not decided to retire, it might be kind of fun to run against the likes of Williamson. “Yes, that’s all I need,” Waxman said, then muttered something under his breath in Yiddish.A few days later, I was sitting in Marianne Williamson’s home in Brentwood, a luxury apartment just off Wilshire Boulevard. It is a warm and vast space, filled with books, art and frantic activity. “Can someone hand me my glasses?” Williamson called out, and an aide quickly fetched them. She was sitting in her living room, Googling around for a quote from Thomas Jefferson that she wanted to share with me. “You know the one,” she said. “It’s on the monument.” She said she would email it to me.Williamson, it should be noted, looks amazing for 61, in that well-moisturized-L.A.-famous-person kind of way. She is both self-assured and, it seems, hypersensitive to caricature. A Washington Post profile of her had come out a few days earlier, in which she was called “a spiritual sage” and a “New Age guru.” She called it “quite snarky” and has often complained, perhaps with some justification, of the snide perspective of many in the press. When I mentioned to Williamson that Henry Waxman appears to share that snarky view, however, she seemed genuinely hurt. She asked what he’d been saying. When I told her, she paused, took a breath and gathered herself.Williamson said she would like to heal the public record of a few misconceptions:1) “I would never, ever in my life say I want to go to Washington to heal the soul of Washington.”2) It is “creepy” to be referred to as a “spiritual teacher.”3) “I’m an author. When you’ve written 10 books and have six on the New York Times best-seller list — and four have been No. 1 — I think you have a right to be a member of Congress.”4) “I never called myself a spiritual guru.”5) “I am not a woo-woo silly person.”Williamson said that Waxman did many good things in Congress but has become part of a political system that has embraced the “entrenched, calcified thought-forms that maybe were relevant four decades ago.” Like Roske, she is running as an Independent and entered the race well before Waxman announced he was retiring. Williamson also emphasized that she embraces her role as an “outside the box” candidate because “the box is toxic.” Then the phone rang, and she apologized, but she couldn’t be late for the next thing: it was live. She added one more thought before getting on the line: “There is a cancer that is eating our democracy.”That cancer is the influence of money on politics, which if you can get beyond the caricature is the legitimate centerpiece of Williamson’s campaign. She pounds the theme in house parties throughout the district. The parties are filled with devoted readers and acolytes — Eva Longorias and Grammy winners and a woman from “Glee” — who make up her political base. Heads bob when Williamson discusses money. “The House of Representatives was supposed to be where the shopkeeper could come in and the candlemaker could come in,” she says, but now it is a servant of only the mega-financed. And where else but here, in this fertile crescent of American possibility, could a very wealthy spiritual guru who does not like to be called a spiritual guru go on to become a 21st-century version of the iconic candlemaker-leader that the founders envisioned?“When I started my career, 20 years ago, my conversation seemed fringe,” Williamson said. “Today that fringe is baked into the cake. You are fringe if you don’t know what it is. You’re the one who looks silly today if you don’t have some understanding of some integrated holistic perspective on life.”Williamson is a clear departure from California 33’s more mainstream candidates, and while I have no polling to support this inkling, I get a vague feeling that in the current environment, there might be nothing more powerful than an authentic voice, whether or not Henry Waxman thinks it belongs to a flake. Whether Williamson represents an “outside the box” diversion or a welcome departure remains to be seen, but if your candidacy rests on that question, there are worse places to be running for office than California 33.“This is not just a political issue but a spiritual one,” Williamson told me, and I believed that she believed that. If a society factors an issue only through economics, she went on, “rather than ‘How are the kids?’ ‘Am I harmful to anyone or anything?’ ‘Am I an instrument of good, of higher purpose?’ ” we could end up, in her words, becoming members of some sociopathic new world order. “And a sociopath has no conscience,” she said. “A sociopath has no remorse.”Later that day, I went to see Matt Miller, a Pacific Palisades resident, who was struggling to define himself among the other “outside the box” candidates. Like many of his fellow contenders, Miller has never run for office, and part of his shtick is to convey a sense of faux-wide-eyed discovery over his journey into the fetid campaign world. “I’ve become a telemarketer,” Miller told a crowd gathered at a small fund-raiser at the offices of the talent agency William Morris Endeavor in downtown Beverly Hills. He marveled at the many hours he spends each day on the phone begging people for money. “But I am a telemarketer with a vision for America!”Miller is running as a Democrat, but he speaks the language of the serious-minded Independent. He worked at McKinsey & Company and at the Office of Management and Budget of the Clinton White House and publicly boasts of having read every line of the federal budget. His radio show, “Left, Right and Center,” has a loyal following among the highly educated listeners who make up much of this highly educated district. The show features three hosts — someone on the left, someone on the right and Miller, who occupies the “center.” Even when progressives are in power, as they now are in the White House, “virtually every measure of a good society that progressives care about will be going in the wrong direction,” he said. Meanwhile, he also said, “the G.O.P. is off on some Neanderthal track.” Forty or so supporters, sipping white wine and eating peppered tuna and shrimp on sticks, nodded in affirmation. “There are lawyers and career politicians in this race,” Miller said. “There’s even a spiritual guru!” A waiter in the back cheered. His name was Steve, and he identified himself as a “longtime devotee of Marianne Williamson.”I saw Miller again a few weeks later at a Democratic forum in Pacific Palisades, a self-styled “Mayberry by the Sea.” (As a local favorite, he quoted the T-shirt: “If you’re rich, you live in Beverly Hills. If you’re famous, you live in Malibu. If you’re lucky, you live in Pacific Palisades.” Appreciative chuckles all around.) Miller was joined onstage by Greuel and Lieu, and — typical of the random out-of-nowhere nature of this race — some other guy I’d never heard of named David Kanuth. But as it turns out, Kanuth, a handsome 37-year-old public defender, managed to raise $800,000 last quarter with the help of supporters like Chris O’Donnell, Gwyneth Paltrow and L L Cool J. He immediately signaled his out-of-the-boxness. Kanuth entered the race, he said from the stage, “because I am frustrated by what I see in Washington”; the country, he said, “needs to come together and get things done.” I imagined Waxman muttering in Yiddish about whether anyone had ever thought of this before.Between applause lines about how great Henry Waxman is, the candidates generally yammered on about their own relative out-of-the-boxness. Miller noted that he had written a book “that presidents have read and praised.” He also said something about wanting to create “market incentives to incentivize.” Greuel said she was “a fighter,” “a doer” and “a warrior,” and she wanted to make sure her children and grandchildren have the same opportunities she did. (Another excellent idea.) Then she said something about “a war going on in their country against women” and “a war on gay marriage” and “a war against L.G.B.T.” But the best moment came near the end, when a high-school student asked Greuel what she planned to do about congressional redistricting and gerrymandering. Greuel, who until recently lived outside of the district boundaries of California 33, responded with a stemwinder about the necessity of civic involvement and how her late father taught her the importance of voting. As she spoke, I was reminded that even in this, a supposedly eclectic and creative district, Waxman succeeded, in part, because he came to embody a familiar and nonexotic figure. Liberal and effective, he was entirely palatable, perhaps even more so because of the unglamorous yin he represented to the district’s showbiz yang. He fought hard but played by the rules and occupied a reliable space, even if it was well inside the box.Greuel wound down by asking the high-school student — a senior named Leland Meade-Miller, from Pacific Palisades — if he was going to be 18 by June 3, the date of the runoff.“Yes,” he said, “and the question was about redistricting. . . .”The Palisades debate may have been closed to Independent candidates, but Roske used the weekend to host the inaugural “Roske for Congress Regatta,” a race from near his home dock at the Pacific Mariners Yacht Club to Washington Pier and back. I arrived at his yacht, the Rob Roy, to find about 35 people there on the dock, friends and yacht people and actors, sipping Champagne and holding little plastic American flags. The winner of the race, a British man named Richard Norman, seemed barely aware that Roske was even running for Congress. When I asked if he would vote for him, Norman said sure, why not? “They all start out with such good intentions,” he said, sighing.Melissa Fitzgerald, another friend from the fake White House — she played the assistant to President Bartlet’s press secretary C. J. Cregg — walked by as Roske, in sunglasses and a navy “Roske for Congress” polo shirt, gleefully led a camera crew around the dock. This crew was separate from the hypothetical one that would accompany him to Washington after his election. “They wanted to make a documentary about how a quote unquote ‘ordinary person’ runs for Congress,” he said, a perma-grin returning to his wind-burned face. Louis Armstrong’s “It’s a Wonderful World” played over a speaker. “Brent,” one guest called out, “you look like you could be in a Cialis commercial!”The Rob Roy, which is named for the 18th-century folk hero known as the Scottish Robin Hood, seemed to reflect the winking, mildly subversive nature of Roske’s campaign. He has pledged, after all, to spend no more than $5,000 on the race, or multiple zeros shy of what’s typically needed to run for a congressional seat in the Los Angeles media market. As Roske looked over the boats, arrayed along what he called a “blue-collar yacht club,” he went into a spiel about how sailing is an aspirational exercise. Politics and entertainment are similar in that regard, he said. You envision things, and then you try to make them so, whether they’re reality or fiction. But politics, and the entire business of Washington, is ultimately for keeps: Real lives are affected and not just projected for our amusement, despite plenty of evidence to the contrary. Being a serious candidate entails a great deal of caution, and it explains why so many candidates stay boring, predictable and box-bound. In passing, Schiff told me that “The West Wing” was “a bunch of good-looking people who cry every once in a while.” But the real appeal of the show was its ability to depict why the C. J. Creggs of the world — and, by extension, the Wendy Greuels — stay on message in public.As guests filed off the dock, Roske gathered everyone who remained and laid out some of his ideas, like giving weekly speeches on the steps of the Capitol. Later he called out to a photographer and the assembled guests. “C’mon everyone,” Roske said, standing up on the deck, making lots of hand gestures. “We’re going to do a fake little photo shoot. One, two, three, now everyone laugh like I just said something funny.”