WASHINGTON —  The State Department reported Thursday that an increasing number of governments were suppressing political opponents and restricting the freedom of assembly.In Russia, the State Department said in its annual human rights assessment, “the government continued its crackdown on dissent that began after Vladimir Putin’s return to the presidency.”In Iran, there has been no measurable improvement in the bleak human rights situation there since Hassan Rouhani became president in August, the State Department said, and in Egypt, human rights abuses that were prevalent under President Mohamed Morsi have continued since he was deposed by Gen. Abdul-Fattah el-Sisi, now a field marshal.The report is a sobering assessment of the prospects for the spread of democracy. “A growing number of countries are cracking down on civil society,” said Uzra Zeya, the senior State Department official who supervised the preparation of the report. “Evidence of this reality is apparent in every corner of the globe.”Congress requires the State Department to prepare the report covering the United States’ partners as well as its enemies. The State Department’s briefing room was packed Thursday with foreign reporters and attachés from foreign embassies eager to learn what the assessment said about their countries.In a briefing for reporters, Ms. Zeya said that 2013 was marked by “some of the most egregious atrocities in recent memory,” including the Aug. 21 chemical weapons attack in Syria that killed 1,429 people and what the State Department said were “rampant disappearances” in North Korea.On a positive note, the report said that Myanmar had released more than 1,100 political prisoners and had allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross to visit all of its prison and labor camps. But the report noted that the government had done little to help members of an Islamic minority in Rakhine State who have been displaced by sectarian violence. Tens of thousands of them are still in camps, the State Department said.The overall trend was not encouraging. Surveying the global situation, the report said that more than a third of the world’s people live in countries that are ruled by authoritarian governments, and that there was a widening gap between the rights that are guaranteed by international law and the “daily realities” around the world.In Belarus, the report said, security forces beat protesters and imprisoned the government’s critics on politically motivated charges. In Cuba, the government organized mobs to assault peaceful demonstrators.In China, “repression and coercion, particularly against organizations and individuals involved in rights advocacy and public interest issues, were routine.” In Sri Lanka, it said, attacks on activists have produced “an environment of fear and self-censorship.”In South Sudan, government forces and rebel militias were both blamed for serious human rights abuses, including extrajudicial killings.The report also included pointed assessments of some of the United States’ longstanding allies and negotiating partners. Secretary of State John Kerry stirred controversy in August when he said that the Egyptian military had been “restoring democracy” when it ousted Mr. Morsi.But the State Department report cited “the removal of an elected civilian government” and “excessive use of force by security forces” as among the most significant human rights problems in Egypt.And while the United States is involved in negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program, the report noted that there had been little progress on human rights under Mr. Rouhani.“There have been some steps, as the release of some political prisoners last fall, but over all I would say the situation remains poor,” said Ms. Zeya, who added that among other abuses, the report detailed “allegations of torture, political imprisonment, executions in the absence of due process, which have gone up under this government, harassment of ethnic and religious minorities.”Bahrain has been a touchy subject for the Obama administration: The United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet has its headquarters there. The country has a Sunni-led monarchy and a Shiite majority and has been rife with sectarian tensions.“The most serious human rights problems included citizens’ inability to change their government peacefully; arrest and detention of protesters on vague charges, in some cases leading to their torture in detention; and lack of due process in trials of political and human rights activists,” the report stated.Turkey, a NATO member and important American partner in the Syrian crisis and on other issues, was cited in the report for a number of abuses, including against the news media.“Authorities imprisoned scores of journalists who remained incarcerated at year’s end, most charged under the antiterror law or for connections to an illegal organization,” the report said. “Of particular note, authorities used excessive force in response to the summer’s Gezi Park protests, leading to mass casualties (including seven deaths) and an overall diminution of freedom of expression and press.”