Flashbulbs popped as Anna Wintour greeted Robert De Niro and Harvey Weinstein. Courteney Cox and Christy Turlington caught up by the bar. John McEnroe and Ron Howard posed for pictures nearby.And in one corner of the room, Mayor Bill de Blasio was discussing the finer points of Canadian social democracy.The Vanity Fair party for the Tribeca Film Festival, held on Wednesday night in the floodlit foyer of the State Supreme Court building in Lower Manhattan, was not exactly a natural setting for Mr. de Blasio, he of the modest Park Slope townhouse and regular-guy persona.But the mayor, making his social debut on the city’s glitterati circuit, quickly found his niche.His arrival, 75 minutes after the party began, sent a stir through the A-list crowd. Mr. de Blasio and his wife, Chirlane McCray, were swarmed by guests, including Mr. De Niro and Mr. Weinstein. Graydon Carter, the editor of Vanity Fair, said hello. Sandra Bernhard, the comedian, greeted the mayor and his wife with kisses on the cheek.The actress Christine Baranski, standing patiently at the mayor’s side, waited for nearly 10 minutes before she could slip in a greeting.“I told him, ‘Let me know if I can do anything,’ ” Ms. Baranski said afterward, saying she first met Mr. de Blasio at a fund-raiser hosted by the actress Cynthia Nixon. “He was such an underdog at the time, but I thought he had his heart in the right place.”Among the first to speak with the mayor was Mike Myers, the “Austin Powers” star, who quickly engaged Mr. de Blasio in a discussion of Pierre Trudeau, the former Canadian prime minister and liberal icon.Mr. de Blasio was pleased. “In all of my political discussions over all the years, no one has ever referenced Pierre Trudeau before, so I gave him great points for that,” the mayor said afterward.It was his first Vanity Fair gala, and in a brief interview, he said he was enjoying himself. The Tribeca Film Festival, created in part to promote Lower Manhattan after the Sept. 11 attacks, was “a beautiful, powerful story,” he said, “and I’ve said to them, ‘Anything I can do to help.’ ”Still, Mr. de Blasio was not entirely comfortable with red-carpet culture. Told by a reporter that he and his wife looked glamorous, the mayor was quick to demur. “Well, I don’t think we’re trying for glamour,” Mr. de Blasio said, a touch defensively. “We’re wearing our business clothes, if that’s O.K.” Like any good party, this one had a frisson of political intrigue to go with the hors d’ouevres (in this case, from the kitchen at Per Se).Raymond W. Kelly, whose tenure as police commissioner has been criticized by the mayor, stood mere feet away from Mr. de Blasio, but the two did not appear to speak. Mr. Kelly did, however, engage in a friendly chat with another guest: Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.The governor and mayor, who have had differences of late, held court at opposite ends of the room, seemingly opting for a policy of benign neglect. But around 9 p.m., Mr. Cuomo made his way over to the mayor’s corner, greeting Ms. McCray with a kiss and then entering a half-hug with Mr. de Blasio. The men spoke sotto voce, unable to be heard over the Dave Brubeck music on the sound system.Mr. de Blasio, who posed for photographs with Ms. McCray and his chief of staff, Laura Santucci, stayed at the event for about an hour, and he left to warm reviews.The writer and essayist Fran Lebowitz said she had been impressed so far with Mr. de Blasio’s tenure, particularly his efforts to help carwash workers organize a union.Ms. Lebowitz glanced around the room of boldface names. “Maybe he’s coming here to unionize these people,” she said.