SOFIA, Bulgaria —  The lines of panicked depositors in this threadbare capital evaporated as quickly as they appeared in what may have been the shortest banking crisis in history — or potentially the prelude to something more tumultuous.In a city where conspiracy theories are as common as kebab stands, residents have various notions about what caused sudden runs last month on two of Bulgaria’s largest banks.Was it the result of a dispute involving two politically connected businessmen? A plot by foreign agents as revenge for Bulgaria’s suspending construction of a pipeline meant to carry Russian natural gas? Something else? All of the above?Whatever the reason, the runs on Corporate Commercial Bank, or K.T.B., and First Investment Bank, or F.I.B., have focused new attention on the fragile economy and dysfunctional politics that are hobbling Bulgaria.While Bulgaria seemed to have much promise when it joined the European Union in 2007, it remains the bloc’s poorest country. Bulgaria has a per capita gross domestic product equivalent to $16,300 — less than half the European average. The government has been accused of mismanaging the economy to the point where the European Union has frozen billions of euros in aid.Moscow’s displeasure with Bulgaria’s recent decision, under European Union pressure, to suspend work on the South Stream pipeline, which would transport gas across the Black Sea, has raised concerns about more tension in a region already rattled by the Ukraine crisis. On Monday, the Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, was in Sofia to discuss the pipeline.For many here, Bulgaria’s problems stem from ties between some businesspeople and the increasingly unpopular Socialist-led government of Prime Minister Plamen Oresharski, who took office little more than a year ago but has agreed to hold early elections on Oct. 5. The current government is expected to resign by the end of the month, and an interim cabinet will preside until the new government is elected.The bank runs only deepened the disillusionment among foreign investors and within the multinational business community. And they shook confidence in the ability of the Bulgarian National Bank — the central bank — to supervise the country’s financial system and called into question its status as one of the few government institutions that functioned reasonably well.While both K.T.B. and F.I.B. are Bulgarian-owned, F.I.B. kept its doors open after assurances of support from the government. K.T.B. has not yet reopened.“Our banking system, they say, is one of the most stable in Europe,” Ivailo Stefanov, a 36-year-old construction engineer, said as he left an F.I.B. branch in Sofia last week. “Well, if you can shake up such a stable system in two weeks, what does that say about how stable everything else is?”With an educated middle class and attractions including Black Sea beaches and Balkan peaks, Bulgaria was once a magnet for foreign companies.But outside investment, which totaled more than $9 billion in 2009, fell to an estimated $1.4 billion last year. Corruption and erratic government policy — chronic problems since the fall of Communism — as well as hundreds of millions of dollars in unpaid debts to American- and European-owned electricity producers, have hurt the business climate.“Corruption eats the country,” said David Varod, chief executive of Nu Boyana Film Studios, an American-owned complex on the outskirts of Sofia.Nu Boyana illustrates Bulgaria’s potential and the hazards of doing business here. After buying the former government film studio in 2006 on behalf of Nu Image, a Los Angeles film producer, Mr. Varod, who is Israeli, invested $50 million to repair the derelict facility, which includes a trove of medieval and modern weapons and, outdoors, a huge mock-up of an ancient Roman city.After the American acquisition, Nu Boyana’s work force grew from barely 100 to 2,000 — as many as 3,000 during peak times — according to Mr. Varod. Last year, “The Expendables 3,” starring Sylvester Stallone and Arnold Schwarzenegger, was primarily shot there.But in an interview last week, Mr. Varod complained about the government — including a bureaucracy that he said made it difficult to obtain visas for visiting actors and crew to stay longer than three months.The company had a few million dollars on deposit in K.T.B. and had long worked with it and other local banks, he said. “There was no reason not to trust them.”Branches of K.T.B. remained closed last week, as the bank tried to sort out its problems under emergency supervision by the Bulgarian central bank. At the main office, in central Sofia, a sign taped to the locked door was meant to assure customers that their money was safe, though it also said they would not have access to it until the bank reopened on July 21.The mystery is how the bank run, which later spread to F.I.B., happened in the first place.The generally accepted account is that the panic sprang from a dispute between Delyan Peevski, a media mogul who is also a member of Parliament, and his former business partner, the financier Tsvetan Vassilev. After the two had a falling-out, the story goes, Mr. Peevski withdrew his money from K.T.B., which was controlled by Mr. Vassilev.Both men declined requests to comment for this article.Spurred by reports in the media, depositors, apparently including a large number of corporate customers and state-owned companies, joined the stampede. An estimated $950 million — about a fifth of the bank’s assets — was withdrawn from K.T.B. before it came under central-bank supervision on June 20.The panic then spread to F.I.B. On June 27, customers withdrew about $550 million from the bank after rumors appeared on social media and in text messages. The government arrested at least seven people suspected of spending text messages warning that the bank was about to collapse. Officials of the Bulgarian central bank and the two commercial banks declined requests for comment.Overseas investors are wary.Alex Nestor, vice president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Bulgaria, said, “The investment climate in the country is not something we can be proud of.”The country’s energy industry is a prime example.Much of Bulgaria’s electricity is produced by foreign companies, which sell power to the state-owned utility. The AES Corporation, which is based in Arlington, Va., has invested $2 billion in Bulgaria.But populist parties, which have long dominated Bulgarian politics, imposed price cuts that energy companies said pressed the price of electricity below the cost of its production. In addition, the government-owned electricity supplier owes the generating companies roughly $500 million in unpaid fees, according to people in the industry.The disenchantment is not limited to foreign companies.Atanas Kiryakov is the chief executive of Ontotext, a company that makes software for online publishing. Ontotext’s customers include the British Broadcasting Corporation, and it has offices in the United States and Britain.Mr. Kiryakov joined large protests in Sofia last year after the government tried to appoint Mr. Peevski, the media tycoon, to lead the national security agency.“It was like appointing Rupert Murdoch head of MI6,” Mr. Kiryakov said, referring to the British intelligence service.But he and other Bulgarians say they will be surprised if the next government is much better. The center-right party Citizens for European Development of Bulgaria — led by Boiko Borisov, a former prime minister — is leading in the polls. The party made little progress in ending corruption and improving economic performance from 2009 to 2013, when it held power.“We are a young democracy,” Mr. Kiryakov said. Despite the country’s middle class, “we have a large number of people who are not well educated, who are easy to manipulate,” he said. “Whenever this is the case, you will always have people who will try to exploit this phenomenon.”