MADRID —  King Juan Carlos of Spain said Monday that he was abdicating in favor of Crown Prince Felipe, his 46-year-old son, explaining in an address to the nation that it was time for a new generation to “move to the front line” and face the country’s challenges.The king’s abdication, after almost four decades on the throne, follows health problems but also comes amid a decline in his popularity, particularly as a result of a corruption scandal centered on his son-in-law that has cast a harsh light on the royal family’s lifestyle and finances at a time of economic crisis and record joblessness in Spain.Juan Carlos said he resolved to step down in January, when he turned 76. He said that a generational change would open “a new chapter of hope” and that his son “represents stability” for Spain and the monarchy.The king’s son, who will become King Felipe VI, is a former Olympic yachtsman who studied international relations at Georgetown University and is regarded as relatively untouched by his family’s scandals. In May 2004, he married Letizia Ortiz, a television journalist.The abdication was first made official on Monday by Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy, who called Juan Carlos a “tireless defender of our interests.” The government is set to meet Tuesday to discuss the legislative changes required for the handover, which Mr. Rajoy said would happen soon. He called the abdication “proof of the maturity of our democracy” — a message echoed by most of Spain’s other party leaders. However, some far-left politicians called instead for a referendum on whether to maintain the monarchy, with anti-royal protests also convened in Madrid and other cities on Monday evening.Juan Carlos came to the throne in 1975, after the death of Gen. Francisco Franco. The king was credited with playing a central role in consolidating Spain’s return to democracy, alongside politicians led by Adolfo Suárez, whom the king chose as prime minister. Mr. Suárez died in March.In February 1981, after rebel officers held lawmakers hostage at gunpoint, the king helped abort their coup by ordering soldiers to return to their barracks in a televised speech.He had also been cast as providing stability amid separatist drives in the Basque region and in Catalonia. Separatism has recently gained momentum in Catalonia, whose politicians plan an independence referendum in November that Mr. Rajoy has vowed to prevent. King Juan Carlos has also defended Spain’s unity, saying last December that the monarchy wanted a Spain “we can all fit in.”The king’s reputation has been tainted by questions about the spending habits of his daughter, Princess Cristina, 48, and her husband, Iñaki Urdangarin, the Duke of Palma, who is being investigated in the embezzlement of millions from sports events. The fall in the royal family’s public standing has encouraged Spain’s news media to drop its traditional deference and delve into the love life of the king and other previously taboo subjects.The king himself brought on more scrutiny in April 2012, after falling during an elephant hunting trip to Africa and requiring hip replacement surgery. Outrage over the trip forced him to make a rare public apology.Last year, the main Socialist opposition party took steps in Parliament that for the first time formally requested information about the king’s personal finances, after the newspaper El Mundo revealed that he inherited money from his father, hidden in a Swiss bank. The royal household eventually said the Swiss money had been spent and the account long closed.Carmen Enríquez, a writer and television journalist who specializes in the royal family, said the recent scandals were unlikely to have persuaded the king to abdicate, but probably added to “the sensation of fatigue” he felt.She said Felipe would strive to bring “his own style of leadership,” saying, “The abdication is not just a banal gesture but does instead come with a broader indication of change.”Queen Sofia, whom Juan Carlos married in 1962, will also hand over as queen to Letizia, Felipe’s wife.In its main editorial on Monday, the newspaper El País said that “the fact that the change is taking place with complete normality does not mean that Felipe inherits a completely normal and stable situation, nor that the monarchy benefits now from broad recognition.”Santos Juliá, a historian and columnist, said that holding a referendum on the monarchy would be “politically irresponsible” and violate Spain’s Constitution, but called on the next king to offer far greater transparency, particularly on royal finances.Juan Carlos was born in Rome in 1938, during the Spanish monarchy’s exile and in the midst of a civil war that was followed by a long dictatorship under General Franco. Once in power, Franco brought Juan Carlos back to Spain to oversee his education at a military academy and then handpicked him as the next king. The restoration plan was formalized in 1969 — raising tensions between Juan Carlos and his exiled father, Juan de Borbón.José María de Areilza, a professor of law at the Esade school in Madrid, said that despite being groomed by Franco, Juan Carlos was able to make himself an engine of change in Spanish society. That, he argued, “makes him an extraordinary man in extraordinary circumstances.”