The Nazis kept a long list of writers to settle scores with, but one in particular inflamed them: the left-wing satirist Kurt Tucholsky. In magazine articles and comic poems, he took aim at nationalists, militarists and fat cats. He dipped his pen in a special, distilled venom to describe Hitler and his followers, whom he ridiculed as “little people” in the refrain of “Die Mäuler Auf!” (“Mouths Open!”), one of his most famous poems.In Weimar Germany, Tucholsky (pronounced too-HOLE-skee) was big, the most brilliant, prolific and witty cultural journalist of his time. He remains big in Germany, a widely read author, with sales in the millions. In the English-speaking world, however, he barely exists.Berlinica, a tiny publishing house with offices in New York and Berlin, wants to correct this injustice and give Tucholsky the kind of push that the novelist Jonathan Franzen, in “The Kraus Project,” last year gave to Karl Kraus, the other great German-language satirist of the 20th century. It is essentially a one-woman effort by Berlinica’s founder, Eva C. Schweitzer, a German freelance journalist who founded the press in 2010 to satisfy the appetite among readers of English for all things Berlin-related.Thus far, her offerings have included a Berlin cookbook, a CD of Berlin cabaret songs and “Rocking the Wall,” Erik Kirschbaum’s account of Bruce Springsteen’s 1988 concert in East Berlin.And now, Tucholsky. “He’s a genius writer, and a lot of the work, although it was journalism, still feels contemporary,” Ms. Schweitzer said recently. “For New York especially, he’s a good fit. There are lot of things that are similar — the attitude to life, for example.”Last year, Berlinica published “Berlin! Berlin! Dispatches From the Weimar Republic,” a collection of Tucholsky’s journalism in prose and verse. In May, it followed up with the first English translation of “Rheinsberg: A Storybook for Lovers,” the novella that put Tucholsky on the literary map when it was published in 1912.Hardly longer than a short story, “Rheinsberg” tells the sweet tale of an unmarried Berlin couple who head out for a weekend holiday, with sex on the agenda, to Rheinsberg and its castle, once the home of Frederick the Great. Nothing much happens. The lovers talk and walk and, at one point, watch a film on a cinematograph. Their free and easy way with each other, and the casual treatment of sex, wafted over younger readers like a fresh breeze.“With ‘Rheinsberg,’ he became a shooting star,” said Peter Böthig, the director of the Kurt Tucholsky Museum, in Rheinsberg Castle. “In the style and the atmosphere, you had the feeling of a new generation arriving.”The First World War changed everything. Tucholsky, conscripted after completing his doctorate in law, emerged a doubly committed pacifist and leftist. Writing for Die Weltbühne (The World Stage), a theatrical weekly that had expanded its scope and become the leading voice of the independent left, he poured scorn on the reactionary institutions of the old regime, the follies of the Weimar Republic, the pretensions of Berliners and the peculiarities of the German character.He came up with four pseudonyms, with four artistic personalities, to address the wide variety of topics that engaged him.Theobald Tiger wrote satirical verse, along with lyrics for the most important of Berlin’s cabarets. Peter Panter (the surname means Panther) handled theater criticism, book reviews and light satire, overlapping with Kaspar Hauser, who often covered the same subjects but from the perspective of a German befuddled by the postwar world. The slashing attacks fell to Ignaz Wrobel, whom Tucholsky described as a hunched-over redhead with a buzz cut, eyeglasses and an excess of bile.Tucholsky used the expression “five fingers on the same hand” to describe his writerly personae. “United we love, united we hate,” he wrote. “We march separately, but we all attack the same enemy.”Multiple identities gave him free rein to be funny and furious in different registers. His humor could be observational and genial, a bit like Robert Benchley translated into German. “Berlin! Berlin!” includes one of his best-known Panter essays, the nonsensical “Where Do the Holes in Swiss Cheese Come From?” When roused, he cranked up the gleeful malice that was H. L. Mencken’s trademark.He also had a strong line in absurdity. “The chaos which it was announced would begin at 8:30 has been postponed by an emergency decree of the government,” he wrote in 1931 in the first of several mock news releases inspired by a rash of newspaper headlines breathlessly announcing one new crisis after another.“Today the National Chaos Agency began its work,” he wrote two days later. “Each chaos must have a special approval for Outbreak of Chaos obtainable from the National Chaos Agency. After which, there is an inspection by the National Chaos Inspection Office as well as by local chaos officials.”“In German, we are not used to funny writers like him,” Mr. Böthig said. “There are only a few with his wit or esprit.”Tucholsky’s range extended from the hard-hitting, accusatory commentary of “Deutschland, Deutschland, Über Alles,” a savage portrait of Weimar Germany produced in collaboration with the artist John Heartfield, to the lyrics — romantic, satirical or risqué — that he turned out by the dozen for Berlin’s leading cabarets.“He had an unmatched sense of humor, with very funny puns and images,” said Alan Lareau, a professor of German at the University of Wisconsin, Oshkosh, who has made a study of Weimar cabaret.The pith and the punch of his cabaret work translated brilliantly to his anti-Nazi satires. Too brilliantly, in the end.After taking power in 1933, the Nazis burned Tucholsky’s books and stripped him of his citizenship. When the Institute for the Study of the Jewish Question published “The Jews in Germany” in 1935, Tucholsky rated 23 pages, more than any other writer. That year, living in exile in Sweden, he took a fatal overdose of drugs, despondent over the collapse of democracy and his own lot, at 45.“I am slowly going crazy from reading how I have ruined Germany,” he wrote to a friend. “For 20 years, I have been pained by one thing — that I have not been able to succeed in removing one policeman from his post.”