TUNIS, Tunisia —  A year ago, Tunisia’s main Islamist party, Ennahda, feared for its future. Political assassinations, an emerging insurgency and economic discontent had battered its coalition government.When the Islamist government in Egypt was overthrown and the leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood imprisoned, Ennahda’s members worried about a similar fate. Their coalition held on for several more months before negotiating a face-saving exit and eventually ceding power to a caretaker government in January.Now, as Tunisians vote Sunday in national legislative elections, Ennahda has shown itself a nimble survivor. It enters the election as a front-runner and is expected to win 25 to 30 percent of seats, which may give it a chance to govern yet again.Ennahda is managing to adapt by presenting itself as a legitimate Islamist alternative working within Tunisia’s still evolving democratic system, its leaders argue.The party’s opponents blame it for fueling Islamic extremism, but Ennahda’s leadership says that only by providing a mainstream outlet for popular Muslim sentiment can Tunisia blunt the winds of radicalism that have swept the region.Almost four years after events in Tunisia initiated the Arab Spring, the country still faces economic stagnation and the threat of popular unrest, with a nagging Islamist insurgency at home and large numbers of its young people joining the militants of the Islamic State in Syria, most of which the Ennahda government has been blamed for.That threat was evident on Friday as security forces stormed a house in a northern suburb of the capital, Tunis, ending a 27-hour siege with suspected militants and killing five women along with one gunman.Prime Minister Mehdi Jomaa, who has led the caretaker government since January, said in an interview just after the siege that he had ordered extra security for the election period to guard against insurgent groups intent on disrupting not only the vote but Tunisia’s democratic transition more generally.“They know that in the region one of the key pillars is the success of the Tunisian experience,” he said. “The terrorists want to target this experience, and they want to make it abort while it is still fragile.”While Ennahda’s opponents remain wary of its Islamist agenda, the party has taken steps since leaving power to open its ranks, polling members for their input, with an eye on the elections. The result is a revamping of its candidate lists to include new and independent faces, intended to reverse its sliding popularity.“We avoided disaster through consensus,” Ennahda’s founder and head of the party, Rachid Ghannouchi, told party members this month at the opening of the election campaign.He was describing how Tunisia’s parties resolved last year’s political crisis through compromise, but he may as well have been talking about Ennahda itself.The agreement to appoint a caretaker government, which is overseeing the elections, saved the country from a paralyzing impasse — and also secured acceptance of Ennahda’s continued participation in politics.Since then, the party has replaced two-thirds of its elected deputies who had served in the National Constituent Assembly.“We are trying to bring change to the party,” said Abdessatar Rejeb, a member of the party’s 150-member advisory council.Much of that call for change came from the grass roots in regions away from the capital that were feeling neglected. The regional offices put forward their own nominations, and in many cases the leadership accepted them.In some regions independent candidates have been brought in to head Ennahda’s list, over its own members, including women and young people.There is, of course, political calculation, too. For instance, in Sidi Bouzid, the cradle of the Tunisian revolution, the party leadership chose to offer spots to two independent candidates who represent the region’s biggest tribal families and can guarantee a large vote.“The idea was to broaden the base,” said Radwan Masmoudi, director of the Center for the Study of Islam and Democracy, who accompanied Mr. Ghannouchi and several other Ennahda officials on a recent trip to the United States.“We want to be for all Tunisians, and we want to attract them with our program,” he quoted Ennahda officials as saying.“Ghannouchi played a key role in this,” he added. “He had spent 20 years in exile in London, and he had seen many other Islamist parties and movements fail, and he does not want to replicate those failures. He wants to succeed.”Mr. Ghannouchi was looking in particular at the success of Turkey’s ruling Islamist party, and seeking to avoid the experience of Egypt and Libya, where Islamists have been imprisoned and embroiled in civil strife, he said.The comparison with Turkey is readily visible. Ennahda opened its electoral campaign with a convention, showing a glossy video portraying young Tunisians rallying around the national flag, which was a close copy of a Turkish political video.Mr. Ghannouchi has often stated that his aim is not just to retain Ennahda’s dominance in Tunisia’s legislature, but to make Tunisia a model for the world of moderate, tolerant, democratic Islamism.To achieve that he insists that, faced with difficult transitional reforms and an economic crisis, Ennahda should not try to rule alone, or as it did for two years with only two small parties as coalition partners.Ennahda’s coalition government was often criticized for incompetence but also came under attack from secular parties and members of civil society opposed to Ennahda’s Islamist agenda.Many of Tunisia’s institutions, in particular the police, judicial system and news media, which are still dominated by officials loyal to the ousted President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, were also hostile leading to strikes and protests. Drawing from those lessons, Mr. Ghannouchi and other party officials say Ennahda will aim to build a broader coalition if it wins this time. They propose forming a national unity government with their main electoral rival, Nidaa Tounes, despite that party’s opposition to Ennahda.Mr. Ghannouchi has also proposed bringing into a unity government some of the most vociferous of the secular opposition, including the leftist parties that drove many of the protests and strikes against Ennahda.“We hold tight to politics geared around consensus,” Mr. Ghannouchi told members at the start of the campaign. “We cannot govern with a majority of 51 percent. A 51 percent majority would be enough in a stable democracy, but we are in transition.”For much the same reason, Ennahda has not declared a candidate for the presidential election in November. If Ennahda wins this election it could then play the role of kingmaker.It has yet to voice support for any other candidate. But if it does get to form the government, it will likely support a presidential candidate from the old guard who could mitigate some of the opposition that an Ennahda-led government would provoke.“Ennahda doesn’t want to be the bogeyman of Tunisian politics,” Mr. Masmoudi said.