HONG KONG —  Three co-founders of a pro-democracy campaign that paved the way for civil disobedience demonstrations in Hong Kong’s streets told protesting students on Tuesday that it was time to go home, saying that the students’ beleaguered protest camps faced too many dangers of worsening violence.The leaders of Occupy Central With Love and Peace urged the retreat a day after the main remaining street camp, in the Admiralty district, was shaken by rifts and clashes with the police after student leaders began an unsuccessful effort to besiege the nearby city government offices. The police drove the crowds back and pushed into the area controlled by the protesters.“Our young people have used their bodies to withstand the blows of police batons; their blood and broken bones have brought us the deepest sorrow,” Benny Tai, an associate professor of law at the University of Hong Kong who is the most prominent leader of Occupy Central, said Tuesday at a news conference.“We three urge the students to retreat, to put down deep roots in the community and transform the movement,” Mr. Tai said.The call to retreat was the most forthright and prominent yet from older democracy advocates in Hong Kong, who, while supporting the youthful protesters, had voiced deepening fears that the street occupations were angering residents and risking clashes with the police and with organized opponents.The call from the three leaders carried more weight than those of others who have urged the demonstrators to abandon their camps, because Occupy Central has been so closely identified with the idea of using street-level civil disobedience to advance demands for democracy. The group was founded on the premise that if the Hong Kong government failed to heed demands for a fully democratic electoral system, residents should stage peaceful sit-down protests in Central, the city’s main financial district, which is filled with skyscrapers and expensive shops.In the end, Occupy Central did not instigate the student-led protests that evolved into street camps across the city more than two months ago. But Mr. Tai endorsed the students’ sit-in at the city government’s offices, which expanded into the street occupations after a failed police operation to disperse the protesters. Now he and two co-founders of Occupy Central, Chan Kin-man and Chu Yiu-ming, have added their weight to those telling the protesters that it is time to leave.Two weeks ago, Mr. Chan, a sociologist, published a newspaper commentary urging the protesters to retreat and focus their energies on community mobilization and education. Public opinion surveys show that growing numbers of Hong Kong residents feel that the protests have gone on too long.Last week, the police cleared the protest camp at Mong Kok, a crowded shopping and entertainment area, and for days since, protesters have returned at night and clashed with the police. Apart from the main remaining protest site at Admiralty, protesters continue to occupy a patch of road at Causeway Bay, a retail area thronged by tourists from mainland China.Mr. Tai said the police were increasingly aggressive against protesters, although the government has said that officers have used extraordinary restraint despite exhaustion and intense pressure. “Some of the front-line officers seem to be out of control,” Mr. Tai told reporters, speaking in a meeting room close to Admiralty. “At this very critical moment, we should protect ourselves and leave this very dangerous place.”The leaders of the two student groups that instigated the failed siege of the city government offices on Sunday night have expressed contrition for that decision, but they have given no public sign of abandoning their protest camps. Joshua Wong, the most prominent of the student leaders, announced on Monday night that he and two other young demonstrators would start a hunger strike to force the government to negotiate.On Tuesday, Leung Chun-ying, the chief executive, or leader, of the government, said the hunger strike was unwise, especially as cold weather had set in, and he reiterated that the Hong Kong authorities would not deviate from election rules proposed by the Chinese government, according to a transcript on his website. Those rules would require that before candidates for chief executive face voters, they win approval from a committee dominated by members loyal to the Chinese government. The protesters say that screening candidates would make any election a sham.“I’ve said before that any resistance is futile,” Mr. Leung said.Mr. Tai and the other co-founders of Occupy Central said they would give themselves up to the police on Wednesday, although the police have not been pursuing them.“To surrender and bear the legal consequences is to respect the rule of law,” said the statement from the three men. “To surrender is not to fail. It is a silent denunciation of a heartless government.”