Starbucks announced revisions on Thursday to the way the company schedules its 130,000 baristas, saying it wanted to improve “stability and consistency” in work hours week to week.The company intends to curb the much-loathed practice of “clopening,” or workers closing the store late at night and returning just a few hours later to reopen, wrote Cliff Burrows, the group president in charge of American stores, in an email to baristas across the country.He specified that all work hours must be posted at least one week in advance, a policy that has been only loosely followed in the past. Baristas with more than an hour’s commute will be given the option to transfer to more convenient locations, he wrote, adding that scheduling software will be revised to allow more input from managers.The changes came in response to an article on Wednesday in The New York Times about a single mother struggling to keep up with erratic hours set by automated software.“This has given us a real opportunity to hear partners’ voices and say, ‘Are we being clear enough, and are our intents and practices being followed?’ ” Mr. Burrows said in a phone interview.Though Mr. Burrows vowed in his letter to revise the company’s scheduling software, he could not say exactly how in the interview.The change comes amid a growing push to curb scheduling practices, enabled by sophisticated software, that can cause havoc in employees’ lives: giving only a few days’ notice of working hours; sending workers home early when sales are slow; and shifting hours significantly from week to week. Those practices have been common at Starbucks, and many other chains use even more severe methods, such as requiring workers to have “open availability,” or be able to work anytime they are needed, or to stay “on call,” meaning they only find out that morning if they are needed.Some Starbucks workers greeted Thursday’s announcement with mixed feelings. “I’m generally pretty positive about Starbucks,” Amber Tidwell, a barista in Fresno, Calif., said in a phone interview.“Encouraging managers not to rely entirely on the automated software is the best thing they can do. But I’m doubtful of how many managers will actually do it,” she said, because of the wide variation in how managers at different stores treat their employees.As for the notice, “one week is actually a low-road standard,” said Carrie Gleason, a labor organizer with the Center for Popular Democracy, adding that many chains provide two or three weeks’ notice of hours. On Thursday night, she and other organizers posted a petition for Starbucks workers calling for better work policies.Starbucks prides itself on progressive labor practices, such as offering health benefits and stock. But its goals — treating workers well and making profits — are in tension. Baristas across the country say that their actual working conditions vary wildly, and that the company often fails to live up to its professed ideals, by refusing to offer any guaranteed hours to part-time workers and keeping many workers’ pay at minimum wage.Scheduling has been an issue at headquarters for years, said Tim Kern, who was an executive at Starbucks for two decades and is now starting a small coffee-roasting company of his own. “Labor is the biggest controllable cost for front-line operators, who are under incredible pressure to hit financial targets,” he said.Jannette Navarro, the San Diego barista whose scheduling troubles were chronicled in the Times article, was still trying to stay afloat Thursday, looking for a permanent place for her and her 4-year-old son, Gavin, to live. She said a more stable schedule and paycheck would allow her to plan how much she could afford to spend on a new home, re-establish a routine for her son, and maybe return to community college.“I want to surprise everyone,” she said, “because no one is expecting anything of me.”