A Malaysian appeals court sentenced Anwar Ibrahim, the country’s opposition leader, on Friday to five years in prison on charges of sodomy, a conviction that critics described as an attempt to block the opposition’s ascendancy at a time when the governing party’s popularity is waning.Mr. Anwar, 66, was due to register for a local election next week, and a victory could have put him in charge of the country’s richest state, Selangor, which is under opposition control. Although Mr. Anwar is appealing the court decision, and he was released on bail Friday, the conviction bars him from office.“You have got what you wanted,” Mr. Anwar shouted in court, according to Malaysiakini, an online news agency.Anal sex, or “carnal intercourse against the order of nature” as described in the criminal code, is punishable by 20 years in prison in Malaysia.In overturning a 2012 ruling that had acquitted Mr. Anwar, the appeals court said Friday that the lower court had mistakenly ruled that DNA evidence had been contaminated.The complainant in the case, Mohamed Saiful Bukhari Azlan, was a former campaign worker for Mr. Anwar who filed the case in 2008.Mr. Anwar, a former deputy prime minister, was expelled from the governing party 16 years ago and has been locked in a personalized power struggle with his former political party.He was first accused of sodomy in 1999 in a separate case and served six years in prison. That conviction was overturned in 2004, but the courts upheld charges that he had abused his power as a government official to cover up the allegations.Unlike in the first case, when the Internet was still nascent, critics of the governing coalition known as Barisan Nasional, or BN, vented their anger at the decision on social media Friday.“After more than 15 years, BN uses the same old tactic,” said Hannah Yeoh, a lawmaker with the opposition Democratic Action Party. “Shameful. Pathetic. Disgusting.”“Malaysians have thought they had come out of an era of circus politics,” read another comment, by Lee Ee May, a management consultant. “Today’s sentencing proved that we are still very much at the pinnacle of it.”Mr. Anwar has periodically led large street demonstrations against the government since leaving the governing party, and opposition leaders called for a protest at a stadium near Kuala Lumpur on Friday.Malaysia’s inspector general of police, Khalid Abu Bakar, warned that unauthorized street demonstrations were illegal and urged “all parties to be calm about the decision.”The governing party, led by Prime Minister Najib Razak, has used paternalistic and mildly authoritarian laws to lead Malaysia since independence from Britain in 1957. The print media and broadcasters are closely monitored by the government, and the right to peaceful protest is circumscribed. Opposition forces say there are many irregularities in the election process.Jen Psaki, a State Department spokeswoman, said Friday that Mr. Anwar’s trial “raised a number of concerns regarding the rule of law and the independence of the courts.” President Obama is due to visit Malaysia in April.Michael Vatikiotis, the director for Asia of the Center for Humanitarian Dialogue, said Friday’s decision was part of a “serious challenge” for democracy in Southeast Asia where “courts are used to override popular sovereignty and preserve the power status quo.”Across the region, “corruption charges are flung in all directions to undermine politicians,” he said. “Eventually there will be a popular backlash against the lack of judicial credibility.”The government said in a statement after the verdict that the case was “between two individuals and is a matter for the courts, not the government.”It said, “Malaysia has an independent judiciary.”