‘This Changes Everything’To the Editor:Even though Rob Nixon calls Naomi Klein’s latest must-read book, “This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the Climate” (Nov. 9), “almost unreviewable,” he does the job. Every citizen needs to read this book and think long and hard about how our democracy, and even our nonprofit “nature” conservancies, have been hijacked. Nixon quibbles with Klein’s subtitle, but how else are we to frame this full-scale war on where we all must live?I would quibble less with the subtitle and more with Klein’s scant attention to the oil-glugging elephant in the room — the United States military (for which I’d recommend “Drift,” Rachel Maddow’s excellent book on the subject).It’s appropriate that this issue of the Book Review also contains a Children’s Books section — what kind of Earth will be their home?MARGARET KELLEYAUSTIN, TEX.*The Kid Is Not All RightTo the Editor:I was appalled by the nasty opening to Joy Williams’s front-page review of Denis Johnson’s novel “The Laughing Monsters” (Nov. 9). An educated reader offered a legitimate, informed opinion of Johnson’s work (“I’ve always felt he doesn’t like his characters very much”) and Williams mocks her . . . for what? For daring to voice an opinion that differs from her own? For deciding not to pursue a career as a writer? Was Williams just taking revenge because the woman’s kid spilled juice on her? It was an unpleasant introduction to the Book Review.DIANA ASHERSCARSDALE, N.Y.*Perverse DiversityTo the Editor:Re the review of “Empire of Sin” (Nov. 9): I fail to see how Walter Isaacson considers a Blue Book with symbols for prostitutes (“w” for white, “c” for colored, “J” for Jewish and “oct.” for octoroon) a “vivid expression” of New Orleans’s “tolerance and diversity,” the Storyville era notwithstanding.HELEN FEITVILLANOVA, PA.*Dying at HomeTo the Editor:In her review of Atul Gawande’s “Being Mortal” (Nov. 9), Sheri Fink claims that Gawande made “a sweeping statement about the proportion of home deaths in ‘some African cities’ based on a study that involved only two cities in Botswana.” We wrote the study Gawande refers to. A longitudinal, retrospective countrywide survey of Botswana’s death data, it showed that people who dwell in cities, of which there are two, and towns, of which there are six, more often die in hospitals than their rural-dwelling counterparts. Bot­swana’s rapid economic growth and urbanization track with more hospital than home deaths, especially for people over 80 who do not have chronic illnesses like cancer or H.I.V./AIDS. This is true worldwide, even though most of the world’s population prefer to die at home. We commend Gawande for pointing out that economic progress has not always resulted in progress in end-of-life care.MARK LAZENBYThe writer is an assistant professor at the Yale School of Nursing.JODI OLSHEVSKIThe writer is a visiting fellow at the AgeLab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.WEST HARTFORD, CONN.*Fixing Medical RecordsTo the Editor:Reviewing Nicholas Carr’s “The Glass Cage: Automation and Us,” Daniel Menaker cites electronic medical records as Exhibit A of the thesis that automation impairs our skills, increases dependence on machines and diminishes our experience of others and the world.Many American physicians agree that recording patient data electronically has interfered with “a deeply human, partly intuitive and empathetic process,” and has led to inefficient care. Since no one wants to revive illegible paper charts, however, the indictment encourages us to ascribe these harms to the price of progress.A Canadian physician friend, though, says he uses an electronic record that does not disturb his rapport with patients. He also sees more patients hourly than American counterparts without compromising quality.Why the difference? American physicians must choose from five levels of service when submitting bills. Of necessity, we tend to include extraneous information to justify higher levels and satisfy potential insurance company audits. Canada has only two levels, so doctors’ notes are short and succinct.Electronic medical records in the United States have developed to serve the needs of our billing system. When clinicians must enter data that does not advance patient care, we waste human capital, demoralize physicians and shortchange patients. It is time to revisit those levels and get doctors back to connecting with patients rather than with machines.ALAN B. ASTROWBROOKLYNThe writer is the director of ­hematology and medical oncology at Maimonides Cancer Center.*Meanwhile, OnlineRob Nixon’s review of “This Changes Everything,” by Naomi Klein, was tweeted 1,700 times. Among those who called attention to the review were Margaret Atwood, Raffi Cavoukian, John Cusack, Danny Glover and Oliver Sacks. A favorite in Canada, eh?Readers also responded to the Bookends column (Nov. 2) that asked, “Have you ever had a relationship end because of a book?” No, some commented, but many more mentioned breaking up when a significant other read a book like “American Psycho,” “The Shack” or the Bible. Or Facebook. Others rethought their relationships after reading “Revolutionary Road” and “He’s Just Not That Into You.” For Shannon Patrick Feeney, the book in question was “my journal: end of story.”