Peter Thiel’s new book, “Zero to One: Notes on Startups, or How to Build the Future,” published last week, has enjoyed the kind of carefully calibrated rollout befitting a billionaire Silicon Valley entrepreneur, including a talk at Harvard Business School, an admiring cover story in Fortune and a party at the Four Seasons hosted by the financier Henry R. Kravis.So on Friday night, what was Mr. Thiel, the co-founder of PayPal, doing publicly debating the future of technology with David Graeber, an anarchistic anthropologist who helped plan the Occupy Wall Street movement?That question was certainly on the minds of some of the nearly 200 people who filled the stately library of the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York on West 44th Street in Manhattan, where the debate was held.“I’m a big fan of David Graeber,” said Rick Carp, a magazine researcher, who was clutching a copy of “Total Liberation: The Power and Promise of Animal Rights and the Radical Earth Movement.” (A few seats away, a woman who identified herself as a junior portfolio manager at an investment firm was reading the more equation-heavy “Introduction to Statistical Learning.”)And Mr. Thiel? Mr. Carp hesitated. “Ask me afterwards,” he said.At first glance, the debate, convened by the contrarian left-wing magazine The Baffler (slogan: “The journal that blunts the cutting edge”), certainly seemed one of the odder intellectual couplings imaginable.Mr. Thiel is a libertarian who has supported candidates like Ron Paul and causes like the Seasteading Institute, which wants to create experimental floating cities in the middle of the ocean, beyond the reach of existing governments.Mr. Graeber is a professor at the London School of Economics and a member of the Industrial Workers of the World who believes that both the nation-state and capitalism need to be replaced entirely.But as it happens, the event was conceived less as a cage match than as a friendly meeting of contrarian minds, both of whom happen to think — in seeming contrast to most people in the world — that our supposed age of dizzying innovation is actually an era of technological and intellectual stagnation.“I find it interesting that Peter and I agree very strongly about 20 percent of everything, and probably disagree just as strongly on the other 80 percent,” Mr. Graeber said in an interview before the debate. “But the stuff we do agree on is the stuff no one else agrees with us about.”The seeds of the debate were planted in April 2013, when Mr. Thiel, who had read Mr. Graeber’s book “Debt: The First 5,000 Years,” came to a Baffler event in San Francisco at which he was speaking. Conversation continued at a small dinner organized by The Baffler’s editor, John Summers, that also included the technologist Jaron Lanier and the eco-feminist activist Starhawk.“It was wide-ranging and fun,” Mr. Graeber recalled. “We talked about everything from dreams and brains to philosophy and economics.”From this came the agreement to do a joint event. Did Mr. Thiel reconsider after reading the recent Baffler salvo against him and his fellow techno-libertarians, under the headline “Mouthbreathing Machiavellis Dream of a Silicon Reich”?“Actually, I found that vaguely flattering,” Mr. Thiel said in an interview. “It was the full-on conspiracy theory. In truth, there’s nobody sitting around plotting the future, though sometimes I think it would be better if people were.”If he and Mr. Graeber didn’t plan the future on Friday, they did agree that it needed to be radically different from the present. Mr. Graeber kicked things off with an extemporaneous summary of his essay “Of Flying Cars and the Declining Rate of Profit,” which is included in the new Baffler anthology “No Future for You.” (As of this writing, the book was lagging about 297,000 spots behind Mr. Thiel’s on Amazon.)Once upon a time, he said, when people imagined the future, they imagined flying cars, teleportation devices and robots who would free them from the need to work. But strangely, none of these things came to pass.“What happened to the second half of the 20th century?” Mr. Graeber asked. His answer is that it was deliberately short-circuited by a “ruling-class freak-out,” as “all this space-age stuff was seen as a threat to social control.”Mr. Thiel took the microphone and made a similar argument, citing the slogan of his venture capital firm, the Founders Fund: “We wanted flying cars, instead we got 140 characters.”If he didn’t blame any ruling-class freakout, he did see a loss of nerve and sclerotic bureaucracies. He cited the anarchist slogan “Act as if you are already free,” and praised initiatives like SpaceX, the private space technology company started by his fellow PayPal founder, Elon Musk.“We’re not going to get to Mars by having endless debates,” he said. “We’re going to get to Mars by trying to get to Mars.”The two men, unsurprisingly, parted ways sharply on the kind of politics that would unleash innovation. To Mr. Graeber, the key is replacing what currently passes for democracy with a genuinely participatory system of the sort prefigured by the Occupy movement. The problem isn’t a lack of good ideas, he said, but that “the overwhelming majority of people are constantly being told to shut up.”Mr. Thiel, describing himself as a “political atheist,” said that people should spend less time trying to change the system than simply creating things outside it. And the key to progress, he said, may not be more democracy.In the real world, innovative organizations are often “shockingly hierarchical,” he said. “A start-up is really far from a democracy. People don’t get to vote on things.”Afterward the crowd milled around a modest buffet. A group in business attire approached Mr. Thiel for a photograph. Mr. Graeber signed an admirer’s paperback of “Debt.”It was unclear if any minds had been changed, or if anyone had gotten any closer to Mars. In fact, Mr. Summers, the Baffler’s editor, in an email the next morning, said that a member of Mr. Thiel’s entourage had approached him afterward and revealed that no one on Team Thiel had supported doing the debate, calling it the only stop on his publicity schedule “that was, objectively speaking, a waste of time.”Instead of being insulted, Mr. Summers saw a branding opportunity.“I’m thinking we should embrace the tagline for our next event,” he said. “The Baffler: Objectively, a waste of time.”