BARCELONA —  Defying legal and political objections from Madrid, more than two million Catalans took part on Sunday in a straw poll on independence that the region’s governing politicians have presented as a prelude to breaking away from the rest of Spain.The poll, as expected, resulted in an overwhelming secessionist victory, with 80.7 percent of votes cast in favor of independence, according to the preliminary results released by the regional government of Catalonia early Monday. The results were based on 88 percent of votes counted. The government also forecast the final turnout figure would be 2.25 million voters. However, Spain’s justice minister, Rafael Catalá, told reporters on Sunday evening that the vote had been a “useless and sterile” act of political propaganda orchestrated by the regional government of Artur Mas.Even after being ordered by the Constitutional Court of Spain to suspend the vote, the regional government allowed the straw poll. It has insisted that such a court ban could not override the right of Catalonia’s 7.5 million citizens, who include 5.4 million voters, to decide whether to secede.The Catalan secessionist standoff comes after Scotland voted in September not to break away from Britain. That referendum, however, was authorized by the British government in London. The fight over Catalonia’s future is proving far more contentious and has turned into the biggest political challenge for Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy since he took office in late 2011.He and Mr. Mas have been at loggerheads for two years, initially over fiscal issues. Tensions came to the fore in September when Mr. Mas, who is a late but staunch convert to the secessionist cause, signed a decree approving an independence vote on Nov. 9.In a televised news conference late Sunday, Mr. Mas argued the vote was “a total success,” held despite a central government that had displayed “political short-sightedness and indifference, if not intolerance.”He urged Mr. Rajoy to allow Catalans to hold a formal referendum soon. “Like Quebec and Scotland, Catalonia also wants to decide its political future,” he said.Mr. Rajoy fought to prevent a Catalan vote that he claimed would violate the Spanish Constitution. He told a party conference on Saturday that the Catalan vote had no validity and would have “no effect whatsoever.” Speaking on Sunday on behalf of Mr. Rajoy’s government, Mr. Catalá, the justice minister, also stressed the vote had no legal implications for Spain and warned instead that the attorney general’s office was probing whether charges could be filed against the Catalan organizers of an invalid poll.While trying not to be held responsible for provoking a constitutional crisis in Spain, Mr. Mas has been under pressure from other secessionist politicians to keep Catalonia’s independence plans on track.In recent weeks, the Constitutional Court repeatedly sided with Mr. Rajoy’s government, forcing Mr. Mas to adjust his plans in order to circumvent legal and political objections from Madrid.As a result, the straw poll was organized without any official census of the electorate. In fact, to avoid any institutional involvement, Mr. Mas relied on about 40,000 volunteers to take charge of the ballot. The result is thus unlikely to receive the international recognition that Mr. Mas had originally hoped for.Still, Maria Pilar Lahoz, a history professor who voted Sunday in the Gràcia neighborhood of Barcelona, said that her vote had “full validity for me, even if Madrid doesn’t believe it.”She forecast independence within the coming decade. “It’s still going to be a long struggle, but it’s unstoppable and the door has now at least been opened,” she said.In 2012, when Catalonia last held regional elections, secessionist parties got about 1.8 million votes of 3.7 million cast. Comparisons are hard to make, given the informal nature of the straw poll. Catalans aged 16 and over were allowed to take part, while in 2012, only those 18 and older could vote. The straw poll was also open to foreign residents of Catalonia, as well as to Catalans living outside the region.Corinna Duschat, a German who has been living in Catalonia for five years and also voted in the Gràcia neighborhood, said she was concerned about any attempt to restrict the right of people to vote in a functioning democracy. “I don’t see how Madrid thinks this is an issue that can just be ignored,” she said.In Hong Kong, Coral Puig, who has lived outside of Catalonia for the last four years, volunteered to help organize a local vote for Catalans. “I want to be legally recognized as a Catalan citizen worldwide,” she said by email. “I am not Spanish, and we have been waiting for centuries to get back our identity.”