VIENNA — A year ago, in the days surrounding the Vienna Philharmonic’s internationally televised New Year’s concerts, the orchestra was surrounded by turmoil. This year, not so much.Back then, new revelations about the ensemble’s ties to Nazi officials during and after World War II had just surfaced. In particular, it emerged that in the mid-1960s, when Baldur von Schirach, the governor of Vienna from 1940 to 1945, was freed after 20 years’ imprisonment in Spandau for war crimes, the orchestra sent an emissary to deliver a ring of honor to him, replacing the one it had presented to him in 1942 but that he’d lost after the war.What’s more, questions were raised about the New Year’s concerts themselves — nationalistic bonanzas of Strauss family waltzes and the like that originated on Dec. 31, 1939 — and just how they might have fitted into the Nazi propaganda scheme.That the Vienna Philharmonic, an elite and venerable self-governing institution founded in 1842 and consisting of members of the Vienna State Opera Orchestra, had Nazi connections, and that 13 Jewish members had been expelled in 1938 — some to die in extermination camps or extreme hardship, some to escape to exile — had long been known. Much of this was detailed in “Demokratie der Könige” (“Democracy of Kings”), a book on the Philharmonic published in 1992 by Clemens Hellsberg, a violinist in the ensemble, its first archivist and now its president.The orchestra, under Mr. Hellsberg’s leadership, has itself drawn wide public attention to this history in recent years, notably in a performance of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony in the former concentration camp in Mauthausen, Austria, in 2000, conducted by Simon Rattle.Other information has emerged piecemeal. But critics of the orchestra, notably the Greens, a left-liberal political party led in the Austrian parliament by Harald Walser, have continued to agitate for a more systematic and comprehensive investigation of the orchestra’s history.In response to the uproar last year, the orchestra hired three historians, said to be independent, to look closely at its Nazi past in its entirety. They reported their findings on the orchestra’s website in March, at the time of the 75th anniversary of the Austrian Anschluss, and the waters seem to have calmed a bit; even Mr. Walser called the project at least “a first baby step in the right direction.”For those reasons and others, this year’s concerts seemed relatively free of controversy, and the orchestra was able to ring in peacefully what promises to be an eventful year, which is to include a starring role (along with the Vienna State Opera) in “Vienna: City of Dreams,” a three-week Carnegie Hall festival in February and March, and a concert in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, commemorating the centenary of the start of World War I, on June 28.It may also have helped that word had leaked out a couple of weeks before that the players had voted in October to revoke honors their forerunners had bestowed on prominent Nazi officials in 1942, on the occasion of the orchestra’s centenary, although the orchestra insists that, for whatever reason, it had not planned to announce the revocation.In any case, here were the concerts, conducted by Daniel Barenboim on the evening of Dec. 31 and on the morning of Jan. 1. In an interview beforehand, the usually outspoken Mr. Barenboim seemed not to want to be drawn into extensive comment on the darker sides of the orchestra’s past.“How much guilt do you want to distribute to people who came four or five generations later?” he said. “Admitting responsibility is always a good thing, and the Vienna Philharmonic has done that.”Mr. Barenboim turned the conversation instead toward the program he and Mr. Hellsberg had drawn up for the concerts, expressing pleasure at the way it had come together in rehearsals.“The New Year’s concert is difficult,” Mr. Barenboim said, “because it’s often a program of encores. In this program, there are five waltzes that each have five parts. So five times five, and other pieces for a total of 41.”What was truly remarkable in the event was that Mr. Barenboim conducted the program from memory: all these dance-inspired works, many of them obscure and often reshuffling similar gestures. And the orchestra was at its considerable best, as it generally is for such occasions.One work completely new to the New Year’s concerts was Josef Strauss’s “Friedenspalmen” (“Palms of Peace”), seemingly intended to buttress the orchestra’s attempt to position these concerts for the modern day as events “devoted to friendship, hope and peace,” in Mr. Hellsberg’s words at a celebratory lunch, whatever they may have meant before. The work proved altogether pleasant, though not acutely memorable in this heady context.And there were, of course, staples, including the inevitable final encores, Johann Strauss Jr.’s “Blue Danube” and Johann Strauss Sr.’s “Radetzky March.” Mr. Barenboim carried the theme of friendship into the “Radetzky,” traversing the orchestra at the historic Musikverein and shaking hands with each player, leaving whatever little coordination they needed to the concertmaster, Volkhard Steude.The orchestra continues to amaze with the fresh energy and enthusiasm it brings to the perennials. Where, for example, other orchestras might be embarrassed by the populist touches if not antipathetic to the repertory to begin with, these players sing along with Johann Strauss Jr.’s “Egyptian March” (“La-la-la ...”) and yuk along with Josef Strauss’s “Ohne Sorgen” (“Without Cares”) with gusto.New Yorkers will be able to hear a concert consisting mostly of this kind of fare in March, conducted by Zubin Mehta, among the five concerts the orchestra will play at Carnegie. (The Vienna State Opera will offer concert performances of Richard Strauss’s “Salome” and Berg’s “Wozzeck.”)We will also have ample opportunity to delve more deeply into the questions of Nazi affiliation in a series of symposiums at the Paley Center for Media in February, “Celebrating the Arts: Learning From Politics, War and Reconciliation,” as part of the Carnegie festival.As for the nagging issue of women in the orchestra, another Hellsberg cause that is moving ahead cautiously, I spotted nine women onstage at one time or another out of the 65 or 70 players present. Get out your slide rules.