In an emotional video message recently smuggled out of a Cairo prison, Mohamed Soltan, an Egyptian-American who was arrested last year by Egypt’s military-backed government, appealed to President Obama for help.Mr. Soltan, 26, a graduate of Ohio State University, was detained last August, apparently for using his iPhone and @Soltanlife Twitter feed to document the security forces’ deadly assault on an Islamist protest in which he participated.The video plea, which follows an open letter to Mr. Obama released more than four months ago, was recorded earlier this year after the social-media activist began a hunger strike to protest his long detention. His sister, Hanaa Soltan, a clinical social worker in Washington provided the video to The Times and said that her brother had been held since late March in “a part of Torah prison complex that has a clinic/hospital where he can be monitored due to his failing health.”Speaking into the camera in his appeal to his fellow Americans, Mr. Soltan said, “I’ve had my freedom stripped away from me. Why? Because I was living by the same values and principles” held dear by “our founding fathers.”“You see, before getting arrested,” Mr. Soltan said, “I was documenting crimes against justice, against humanity, against democracy in Egypt — trying to share my American principles with young Egyptians, hoping to build bridges between the two free generations. The very same youth that President Obama publicly praised following the Jan. 25 revolution.”Later in the recording, Mr. Soltan said: “I ask my government — the government of the United States of America — is my life not worth anything to you? Has the life of American citizens become worthless, or is it because my name is Mohamed?” If so, he said later, “this sets a precedent for the plight of the hyphenated American to be ignored, completely.”Addressing Mr. Obama directly, he added: “With your continued silence, you sir are saying that there are, in fact, different variations of American and my type — in this period, in this time — just happens to be the one that matters less, or not at all. I say this because your government moved mountains and sent a chartered plane to evacuate my fellow — blond-haired, blue-eyed — Americans, who were being detained by the same Egyptian military back in 2012.”A doctor chosen by Mr. Soltan’s mother was able to gain access to him in April, and evaluate the toll the hunger strike was taking on his body, thanks to the efforts of the United States Embassy in Cairo, The Guardian reported last month.After Mr. Soltan was shot in the arm during the Aug. 14 raid that cost hundreds of protesters their lives, he had directed a bitter tweet at the American president he said he was proud to have campaigned for in Ohio before the 2008 election: “@BarackObama The Egyptian army put a bullet that fractured my arm that I paid 4 w/my tax dollars! #RiddleMeThat.”Last year, Hanaa Soltan told my colleague David Kirkpatrick that her brother had been an opponent of the Muslim Brotherhood “and very vocal about it as well,” but had joined the sit-in calling for the reinstatement of the ousted Islamist president, Mohamed Morsi, to defend what he considered the democratic norms he was accustomed to in the United States.Salah Soltan, Hanaa and Mohamed’s father, a professor at Cairo University and an outspoken member of the Muslim Brotherhood, was also detained during the crackdown last summer after he offered a public apology for the group’s failure to govern Egypt well during Mr. Morsi’s presidency.When the younger Mr. Soltan appeared in court last month, after more than 100 days on hunger strike, he had to be wheeled in on a prison cot.
@hsoltan @Free_Soltan @soltanlife #FreeSoltan Mohammed Soltan during his trial today. pic.twitter.com/AiH8UlgXUT Nonetheless, he read a defiant statement in which he disputed the “fictional charges” leveled against him and also spoke with bitterness about his apparent abandonment by American officials. “I refuse to give up any part of my Egyptian-American identity,” he told the court. “Because I’ll always love this country no matter how much injustice it brings me and I’ll always love America even though I don’t expect it to do anything to help me as an Arab-Muslim second-class citizen.”Earlier this week, protesters rallied in Cairo to demand justice for Mr. Soltan and another young detainee on hunger strike, Abdullah Elshamy, an Al Jazeera reporter who was detained when he, too, tried to document the deadly raid on the Islamist sit-in at Rabaa al-Adawiya Square in Cairo last August.Just before he was arrested, Mr. Elshamy had uploaded graphic, bloody footage to YouTube, showing the mangled bodies of protesters killed by the security forces that day. Last month, he was abruptly moved from his cell after he, too, managed to record a video message from prison.