Images of the horrors of war are so ubiquitous in the age of the camera phone that they threaten to overwhelm and desensitize us. For movie critics who are exposed more than many people to this barrage of carnage, the impulse after a while is to withdraw into a protective shell of world-weary cynicism.But the Human Rights Watch Film Festival refuses to avert its gaze from war, injustice and oppression. This essential series, presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the IFC Center, begins its 25th season on Thursday at the Times Center with a fund-raising benefit, to be followed over the next 10 days by 22 films of conscience from around the world. Although this edition isn’t as strong as those of the previous two years — there’s no “The Act of Killing” or “The Invisible War” — it’s as honorable and necessary as ever.A paradox of this year’s festival is its revelation of the special power of political theater to distill harsh truths with an emotional force that can surpass the graphic images of cinéma vérité and photojournalism. Take, for example, Madeleine Sackler’s documentary “Dangerous Acts Starring the Unstable Elements of Belarus.” The film is an outcry against the dictatorship of Aleksandr Lukashenko, the country’s president since 1994, that focuses on the politically risky work of the Belarus Free Theater company.The most stinging moments are not graphic scenes of war but excerpts from stark, stripped-down theatrical pieces developed by the company and performed both abroad and in Minsk, the country’s capital and the troupe’s home city. In a searing image from its show “Being Harold Pinter,” which was produced three years ago in New York at La MaMa, actors tangled in a clear plastic sheet struggle to break free.A scene from another production, “Minsk 2011,” pantomimes the police crackdown on a peaceful protest that followed an economic crisis. At a mass demonstration that infuriated the government, there were no placards or rabble-rousing speeches. Thousands of people crowded the streets and sauntered around clapping their hands. In the company’s re-creation of that protest, actors playing policemen rush from the wings, surround the demonstrators and hastily drag them away.Three years ago, some members of the company, founded in 2005, fled Belarus. The scenes of protest and police brutality include footage gleaned from hundreds of hours filmed in collaboration with a cinematographer in Belarus (whom Ms. Sackler directed over Skype) and then smuggled out of the country. The Belarus Free Theater, whose members are as articulate as they are talented, continue to spread the message of determined resistance to oppression.Of the films that visit war zones like Syria, Talal Derki’s “Return to Homs” examines a handful of fighters struggling against the government of President Bashar al-Assad in Homs, a city now mostly abandoned. Much of the footage is shot inside a ruined, nearly deserted neighborhood, which the rebels reach through narrow tunnels they dug themselves. The film focuses on two rebels, Abdul Basset Saroot, a soccer star, and Ossama al Homsi, a cinematographer who disappears from the movie after being detained by the government. What makes “Return to Homs,” which was filmed over two years, heart-rending is its change of mood from celebratory euphoria at the beginning to near-despair at the end.Remarkably, 16 of the 22 features this year are directed by women. Taking a long historical view of a troubled country struggling to emerge from a military dictatorship is Joanna Lipper’s documentary “The Supreme Price,” about Nigeria’s female-directed democracy movement. After a military coup in 1993, Moshood K. O. Abiola, a pro-democracy leader who was considered the victor in aborted  presidential elections that year but never took office, was imprisoned in 1994. Four years later he died under suspicious circumstances.After his imprisonment, his fearless, eloquent wife, Kudirat, took over the movement’s leadership, but she was assassinated in 1996. The history is told through the eyes of their daughter Hafsat Abiola, a Harvard-educated crusader for human rights and democracy who now leads a movement to dismantle the country’s patriarchal structure.The festival’s emphasis on women is measured not only by the number of female directors but also by the tone of their films. The opening-night selection, “Private Violence,” Cynthia Hill’s documentary about domestic violence in the United States, tells the stories of Deanna Walters, trying to escape her abusive husband in North Carolina, and Kit Gruelle, a dedicated advocate for battered women who championed her cause after Ms. Walters was kidnapped and brutalized by her husband. Although the pictures of Ms. Walters’s injuries are appalling, a prosecutor decided that the beatings warranted only a state misdemeanor charge. The sole hope for long-term incarceration involved filing federal kidnapping charges, which Ms. Walters, with Ms. Gruelle’s encouragement, agreed to do. The husband was convicted and sentenced to more than 20 years in prison.The closing-night selection, “Scheherazade’s Diary,” a Lebanese film directed by Zeina Daccache, follows a 10-month therapeutic theater project she set up in a women’s prison outside Beirut. The inmates’ personal horror stories of lethal retaliation against husbands they were forced to marry when many had hardly entered puberty and had no basic knowledge about sex and reproduction are as nightmarish as the desperate crimes they committed.The films by Ms. Hill and Ms. Daccache may be set in different civilizations in different parts of the world, but their visions of institutionalized female oppression aren’t all that dissimilar.