FRONT PAGEAn article on Aug. 31 about savings accounts that encourage deposits by giving account owners a chance to win prizes erroneously included a state among those that had modified their banking laws to allow credit unions to offer such accounts. While Indiana and Connecticut had so altered their laws, New York State’s law had not been modified at the time the article was published. (The bill had passed the State Legislature, but the governor did not sign it into law until September.) The error was only recently called to The Times’s attention.•An article on Monday about the ordeal of a girl who was abducted by smugglers and brought to the United States from Guatemala misstated the field of expertise of David Stoll, who has studied migration in Guatemala. He is an anthropologist at Middlebury College, not a sociologist.INTERNATIONALA picture caption last Wednesday with an article about newly released government documents that show that Henry A. Kissinger made contingency plans for an air assault on Cuba in 1976 after Fidel Castro’s military incursion in Angola misstated the year that Mr. Castro sent troops to Angola. It was 1975, not 1976.NATIONALAn article on Sunday about chaos in schools in Washington State as a result of disagreements over education policy misstated the status of Lakeridge Elementary School under the No Child Left Behind law. While the school is in need of “corrective action” and must set aside a portion of federal funding for tutoring and student transfers, it is not failing. (Lakeridge is operating under a “safe harbor” provision of the law that allows underperforming schools to avoid the failing label if they have shown significant improvement.)NEW YORKAn article on Sept. 23 about a black bear that killed a Rutgers student referred incorrectly to the deadly encounter, using information from New Jersey officials. It is the state’s first recorded death linked to a black bear; it is not the state’s first such death since 1852. (An incident in 1852 cited by New Jersey officials as having occurred in the state actually happened in Arkansas.) The article also misstated the year New Jersey reinstated its bear hunt. It was 2010, not 2009. And because of an editing error, the article referred incorrectly to an incident in 2011 when a bear entered the camp site of a group on a trip in Sussex County. Two boys in the group were not in fact injured.BUSINESS DAYAn article on Thursday about a smartphone application purporting to be from a pro-democracy group in Hong Kong that was being used to monitor demonstrators referred incompletely to the potential threat of the application. While it can infect devices running Apple’s iOS mobile operating system, it can do so only on devices that have been “jailbroken” to bypass some restrictions on downloads; it cannot infect unaltered iOS devices.•A picture credit on Tuesday with an article about new investors in Bitcoin misspelled the surname of the photographer. He is Matt Tuzzolo, not Tozzolo.SPORTSAn article in some copies on Tuesday about the St. Louis Cardinals’ 3-1 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers in Game 3 of their National League division series misstated the game of last year’s World Series in which the Cardinals’ Kolten Wong was picked off first base to end the game. It was Game 4, not Game 6.•Because of an editing error, an article in some copies on Sunday about the Giants’ 2-1 victory in 18 innings over the Washington Nationals in Game 2 of their National League division series misstated the base Asdrubal Cabrera was on when Anthony Rendon drove him in with a single in the third inning. As the article correctly noted elsewhere, Cabrera was on third, not on second.The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.