Russia’s foreign minister urged the European Union on Monday to allow construction to resume on a natural gas pipeline that Moscow is backing.Last month, the Bulgarian government suspended construction of its portion of the South Stream pipeline, which would transport Russian gas across the Black Sea and into the European Union. Bulgaria stopped work under pressure from Europe and from the United States over concerns about Russia’s tension in Ukraine.After meeting with Bulgarian officials on Monday, Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, at a news conference in Sofia, called on the European Union to “resume contact,” adding that “we hope that the talks can be successful.”“We are convinced,” Mr. Lavrov said, “that if there is good will, every problem can be solved.”In an interview with Bulgarian journalists, Mr. Lavrov said that “European legislation should not be applied retrospectively and hamper the agreements under the South Stream gas pipeline project made at an earlier stage.”Mr. Lavrov is scheduled on Tuesday to visit Slovenia, another planned participant in the pipeline, to continue making his case.Bulgaria, a European Union member that used to be part of the Soviet bloc, is caught in the East-West tension. The Bulgarian Black Sea port city Varna, in particular, is considered a crucial link in the South Stream project, which, if built, will enable Russian energy exports to Europe to largely bypass Ukraine.At about 2,400 kilometers, or about 1,500 miles, the proposed pipeline would stretch from southern Russia to its end point in Austria and deliver up to 60 billion cubic meters of natural gas a year.During a meeting with Mr. Lavrov on Monday, Prime Minister Plamen Oresharski pledged that Bulgaria would “continue to make every effort” to proceed with the pipeline in accordance with European Union regulations, according to a statement by the Bulgarian government.Mr. Oresharski’s Socialist-led cabinet, scheduled to resign by the end of the month, has strongly backed the pipeline but suspended construction last month after it faced increasing opposition from the European Parliament and the European Commission.As he arrived in Sofia on Monday, according to local news reports, Mr. Lavrov was confronted by dozens of protesters demanding an end to Bulgaria’s energy dependency on Russia, which supplies more than 80 percent of the country’s natural gas.Tihomir Bezlov, a political analyst with the Center for the Study of Democracy in Sofia, said the Bulgarian government was not in a position to promise anything to Russia.“Sergey Lavrov demonstrated today that Russia talks — that Bulgaria is important,” Mr. Bezlov said. “But his main message was directed at Brussels.”