SAN FRANCISCO —  Despite a class-action settlement in August that was supposed to ensure that Facebook users clearly consent to their comments, images and “likes” being used in ads, it has been business as usual on the service.If you are among Facebook’s 1.2 billion users, the company says, you are automatically consenting to such social ads. Opting out is impossible for some ads, and for others, the control to stop them is buried deep within the service’s privacy settings.But on Thursday, the nonprofit advocacy group Public Citizen will try to step up the pressure on Facebook to change its practices. In a legal brief to be filed with the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco, the group will contend that the settlement violates the laws of seven states, including California and New York, by failing to require Facebook to receive explicit permission from parents before using the personal information of teenage users in advertising.“The default should be that a minor’s image should not be used for advertising unless the parent opts in. Putting the burden on the parent to opt the child out gets it exactly backward,” said Scott Michelman, a lawyer at Public Citizen, which has filed the appeal on behalf of five parents and their children who use Facebook.In a rare reversal, one child advocacy group that initially supported the $20 million settlement, the Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood, has now concluded the deal offers little protection to children and plans to ask the appeals court to reject it.Susan Linn, director of the group, which is based in Boston, said it was supposed to receive about $290,000 under the settlement as part of a distribution of about $4.8 million to nonprofit groups and the law schools of Harvard, Stanford and the University of California, Berkeley.“Giving up the money was a difficult decision for us,” she said in an interview on Wednesday. Ms. Linn said the expected sum was nearly as much as the annual budget of the group, which made headlines in 2009 for a successful effort to force Disney to stop claiming that its Baby Einstein videos increased the intellect of infants and to offer refunds to buyers.But now that she understands the agreement’s implications, she wants no part of it. Facebook is “collecting and using personal information for minors without parents’ consent,” she said. “That’s clearly wrong.”A Facebook spokeswoman, Jodi Seth, defended the settlement in an email on Wednesday.“The court-approved settlement provides substantial benefits to everyone on Facebook, including teens and their parents, and goes beyond what any other company has done to provide consumers visibility into and control over their information in advertising,” she wrote. “The same arguments on state law were raised and rejected by the court last year, and a dozen respected groups continue to support the settlement.”The settlement has yet to be put into effect as appeals by seven different groups wind their way through court.Under the settlement, Facebook agreed to create a system for users aged 13 to 18 to indicate whether their parents were on Facebook and give the parents control over the use of their children’s likes and comments in advertising. If the parents were not using Facebook, the company promised to opt their children out of social advertising until age 18. (Children under age 13 are officially not allowed to use Facebook.)Ms. Seth said the company was still developing the system but it was not yet complete.In January, Facebook also announced it would discontinue the specific type of ad that spurred the original lawsuit, although it said it would sell other ads that showcased likes and comments.Ms. Linn said that she would prefer to see Facebook adopt a policy similar to that of Google, which automatically opts out all users under age 18 from social advertising.Public Citizen’s legal challenge is narrowly focused on Facebook users aged 13 to 18, where the arguments are strongest, but Mr. Michelman said that the whole settlement, approved by a federal judge in August, is problematic for adults, too.“It does little to nothing for anyone’s privacy,” he said.Public Citizen says that the settlement violates laws governing children in California, Florida, New York, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Virginia and Wisconsin. The organization’s challenge is supported by two other child-focused groups, the Center for Digital Democracy and the Children’s Advocacy Institute.The disputed settlement was supposed to end a class-action lawsuit filed by plaintiffs’ lawyers in March 2011 on behalf of individual Facebook users.After reviewing dozens of objections to the proposed deal from various groups, Judge Richard G. Seeborg of United States District Court rejected arguments that it violated state laws protecting the privacy of children.He approved the settlement in August. Eligible Facebook users in the United States were informed that they could receive $15 in compensation if they filed the appropriate paperwork.Jonathan E. Davis, a lawyer at the Arns Law Firm, which led the class-action case on behalf of users, did not respond to an email on Wednesday seeking comment on the challenge.Margaret Becker, whose 16-year-old daughter is one of the people represented by Public Citizen in its appeal, said that children did not understand the implications of sharing information on Facebook.  “They’re turning her into an advertisement for whatever she happens to like,” said Ms. Becker, who lives in Brooklyn and is a nonprofit lawyer working on Hurricane Sandy relief. “I think there needs to be disclosure as well as explicit consent.”