HONG KONG —  A student organization at the forefront of the protests in Hong Kong said on Thursday that it would soon decide whether to abandon the street camps that have divided the city’s pro-democracy forces.The comments from the organization, the Hong Kong Federation of Students, were the latest sign that the demonstrators’ determination to maintain the camps has eroded after more than two months. Yvonne Leung, a leader of the Federation of Students, said in an interview that the group would decide within seven days whether to stay or to leave the two remaining street camps.“We’ve tried both the soft and hard way, we’ve negotiated with them, and we’ve tried to blockade the government headquarters,” she said. “But the government has been unwavering, so we have to make a decision.”Last week, the police cleared one protest camp, in the busy Mong Kok neighborhood. But two others remain: a small camp in the Causeway Bay shopping area and a much larger one in the Admiralty neighborhood, near the city government headquarters. The student leaders have come under mounting pressure from political allies to leave the camps, especially after an unsuccessful attempt to blockade the government headquarters in Admiralty on Sunday.But the protests have been sustained by a loose, grass-roots campaign, and even if student leaders call for a retreat, some ardent demonstrators appear likely to try to stay in the streets.The Federation of Students, which represents university students, initiated a class boycott and protests in late September that expanded into street occupations after the police used tear gas and pepper spray to try to disperse the students, drawing much public sympathy.Joshua Wong, the leader of another prominent youth protest group, Scholarism, said Thursday that his group would discuss the proposal to retreat. But he said that for now, Scholarism was focused on pressing the government into talks over election changes. The protesters want fully democratic elections for the city’s leader, or chief executive, but the city has refused to consider amending the current plan, which would effectively allow Beijing to screen the candidates.Mr. Wong has been on a hunger strike since Monday, hoping to force the government to negotiate. He said he had had nothing but water and a single teaspoon of sugar.“The focus of Scholarism’s work is the hunger strike,” Mr. Wong said at a news conference in Admiralty. “We hope that people will focus on the government’s unwillingness to hold dialogue and on the students’ hunger strike, not on retreating. But we’ll discuss this issue of retreat among ourselves and closely coordinate and communicate with the Federation of Students.”Some pro-democratic members of the Hong Kong Legislative Council have for weeks voiced misgivings about the street camps and urged protesters to find other means to pursue their cause.And on Tuesday, three founders of a leading pro-democracy movement, Occupy Central, said the protesters should leave the streets and find other ways to seek public support.