FRONT PAGEAn article on Friday about the experiences of an American physician, Steven Hatch, at an Ebola treatment center in Liberia misstated the circumstances surrounding a blood test for an elderly man who was examined by Dr. Hatch. The test was delayed and the sample carried an incorrect number, but there was no test mix-up that initially suggested that the man was infected with Ebola.INTERNATIONALAn article on Tuesday about remarks by Hong Kong’s leader, Leung Chun-ying, that disparaged open elections, one of the goals of the pro-democracy protesters in the territory, referred incorrectly to the creation of Hong Kong’s Basic Law, a mini-constitution. It was written before — not after — Britain handed sovereignty of the city back to China.NEW YORKAn article on Saturday about Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s plan to replace Judge Victoria A. Graffeo on the New York State Court of Appeals with Justice Leslie E. Stein, 57, an appellate division jurist in Albany, misstated, in some editions, the former title of Christine C. Quinn, who publicly urged the governor to replace Judge Graffeo. She was City Council speaker, not president. The article also misspelled, in some copies, the surname of an Albany Law School professor who commented on Mr. Cuomo’s choice. He is Vincent Bonventre, not Bonaventre.•The Appraisal column on Oct. 14 about 432 Park Avenue, one of the tallest skyscrapers in New York City, misstated the police’s response to Demid Lebedev’s climb up the building. Mr. Lebedev was arrested and spent the night in jail; it is not the case that he was never arrested.•An article on Oct. 10 about Lincoln Center’s adding solar panels to the roof of the Rose Building referred incorrectly to the building’s connection to the Juilliard School. Part of the Rose Building is used for housing for Juilliard students; the building does not house the school itself. (The school and its classrooms are adjacent to the Rose Building.)BUSINESS DAYAn article on Tuesday about Apple’s earnings misstated Apple’s revenue for its 2014 fiscal year in some copies. It was $182.8 billion, not $182.8 million.•An article on Monday about Aaron Kushner, the C.E.O. and chairman of Freedom Communications, misspelled the given name of a former executive of The Orange County Register who settled a lawsuit over his severance from the newspaper. He is Mark McEachen, not Mack McEachen.SPORTSAn article in some editions on Wednesday about the San Francisco Giants’ 7-1 victory over the Kansas City Royals in Game 1 of the World Series misidentified the Giants player who went to third base on a wild pitch in the top of the fourth inning. He is Hunter Pence, not Brandon Belt.THE ARTSA picture on Wednesday with a report in the “Arts, Briefly” column about the casting of Tatiana Maslany and Thomas Sadoski in a new Neil LaBute play, “The Way We Get By,” was published in error. It showed Steve Pasquale, another actor, not Mr. Sadoski.•A correction in this space on Wednesday for an article about the new Louis Vuitton Foundation cultural center and contemporary-art museum in Paris, designed by Frank Gehry and clad in glass, misspelled the name of a 13th-century chapel on an island in the Seine, a building cited as part of the long Parisian tradition of major structures featuring glass. It is Sainte-Chapelle, not Sainte-Chappelle.FASHIONAn article last Thursday about men’s wear companies started by several sets of brothers misspelled the name of a British boarding school in an allegorical reference to the sort of Brooklynites who would buy clothes from Bespoken, one of the companies. They would fancy themselves as alumni of Eton, not Eaton.HOMEThe Shopping With column on Oct. 9, about cribs selected by Sara Gilbane, misidentified Ms. Gilbane’s alma mater. It is Brown University, not the Rhode Island School of Design.•An article on Oct. 9 about the renovation of a home in Red Hook, Brooklyn, misidentified the material used for the garage door at the back of the house. It is glass, not plastic.•The Deals column in the Currents section on Oct. 9 misstated the original and discounted prices of the Demetra LED table lamp from Artemide. It was originally $635, not $1,045, and will be available through Oct. 31 for about $540, not $888.•Because of an editing error, a report in the Currents section on Oct. 9, about a wallpaper by Sheila Bridges called Hudson Toile, misstated the number of years Ms. Bridges has owned a home in the Hudson Valley. It is 15, not 20.•The On Location article on Sept. 25, about a house in Provincetown, Mass., owned by David Bowd and Kevin O’Shea, misspelled the name of the county in England where Mr. Bowd lived. It is Staffordshire, not Stratfordshire.The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.