LONDON —  Question: How does the West see Africa? Answer: Through a prism, darkly.Africa is the Dark Continent, the Heart of Darkness. It is a somber story of disease and turmoil, corruption and despair, punctuated for decades by military takeovers, rigged ballots and wars that have done it few favors beyond securing the ambiguous gift of foreign aid.Dystopian musings surface easily — and uncomfortably — at a time when African states and regions seem to be associated exclusively with their problems: Ebola in West Africa, gun crime and corruption in South Africa.The leaders of Kenya and Sudan have been indicted by the International Criminal Court. The continent’s newest nation, South Sudan, is mired in conflict. From Nigeria to Somalia, Islamic militants hold great swaths in their thrall. The events once labeled the Arab Spring have left a bequest of chaos in Libya and strongman rule in Egypt.In its latest report on the state of the continent’s governance, the authoritative Mo Ibrahim Foundation, which carries the name of the Sudanese cellphone billionaire who founded it, concluded that, while overall “performance has registered a slight improvement” over the five years to 2013, the pace of that improvement has slowed and “every African country has shown a decline” in one area or another.In 2006, the foundation set up a $5 million prize to honor the leader showing the greatest commitment to democracy and good governance. Last year, for the fourth time in five years, the accolade went unawarded.But is that the whole story? Even the question — How does the West see Africa? — betrays part of the answer, for Africa is not a single entity to be seen through a single prism. Its broad patchwork covers many nations, from sparsely populated desert expanses of Namibia to the ferment of oil-rich Nigeria.There are some who see beyond the turmoil to a more subtle shift.“Despite many setbacks,” said Michael Holman, a British author with long experience of the continent, “Africa is enjoying a cultural renaissance, recovering the self-confidence that had been shattered by successive traumas — the slave trade, the colonial carve-up, the Cold War, the harsh medicine of the International Monetary Fund, all compounded by bad post-independence leadership.”But, evoking a “surge in African novels, the boom in African art, in style and fashion, in music,” there was “evidence of the ‘new Africa,”’ he said in an interview. “With a rapidly growing middle class, a commodity-fueled economic recovery, boosted by the discovery of oil and gas the length and breadth of the continent, Africa is being transformed.”If there is a political counterpoint to those perceived trends, it might well be discerned in a series of transitions currently underway that will indicate whether individual nations can overcome challenges, including the role of Islam, the power of the military and the Big Man culture nurtured by long-serving autocrats.In Tunisia, a runoff vote next month in the country’s first democratic presidential elections has reopened deep divisions between secularists and Islamists.In Burkina Faso, a Western bulwark in the struggle against Islamic militants, the ouster of President Blaise Compaoré led to an interim government in which the military asserted strong influence over a transition to elections by next November.In Zambia, the death in October of President Michael Sata opened a 90-day transition to elections in January that has strained the country’s relative tranquility with factional strife.And in Zimbabwe next week, President Robert G. Mugabe, 90, is expected to use a gathering of his governing party to tighten his 34-year grip on power.Spread around the continent, those diverse states share a common demography: Africa’s median age is less than 20, and, as Mr. Ibrahim said last year, its leadership “must ask itself why our continent appears so frightened of giving the younger generation a chance.”Perhaps another approach is to ask when that generation, like the youthful rioters who forced the departure of Mr. Compaoré in Burkina Faso last month, will try to seize the chances for itself.