BIRMINGHAM, England —  Britain on Tuesday sharply criticized the handling of pro-democracy demonstrations in its former colony, Hong Kong, with the deputy prime minister summoning the Chinese ambassador in protest and warning that the territory’s prosperity was at risk if freedoms were suppressed.The comments marked a hardening of tone from the British government, which normally adopts diplomatic language when discussing events in Hong Kong, given the sensitivities in China about Britain’s status as the former colonial power. Britain returned Hong Kong to China in 1997 after more than 150 years.Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister, said Tuesday that he had called for the urgent meeting with the Chinese ambassador to express his “dismay and alarm” at the situation, while George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, also expressed concerns about the standoff between protesters and riot police.“It is a concerning situation of course,” said Mr. Osborne, who was speaking in Birmingham, where his Conservative Party is holding its annual convention. “I don’t want to add to the tension, but I think Hong Kong’s prosperity and future is dependent on some of those basic freedoms around the freedom to protest and the freedom to participate in their government.”The comments were striking because Mr. Osborne has worked hard to strengthen economic ties with Beijing and to secure Chinese investment in Britain. Relations had been improving recently after strains caused when Prime Minister David Cameron met with the Dalai Lama, the Tibetan spiritual leader, in 2012. (China considers the Dalai Lama an unrepentant separatist.)An aide to Mr. Osborne who was not authorized to speak publicly said that Mr. Osborne’s words were in line with government policy and statements made by other ministers.The protesters are seeking fully democratic elections for the city’s leader in 2017. But under China’s plan, only candidates vetted by a committee friendly to Beijing could run. A more measured statement in early September by British officials had disappointed many of Hong Kong’s democrats.Mr. Clegg, the leader of the Liberal Democrats, said that China had made “solemn obligations to the people of Hong Kong to preserve their rights and freedoms” under the terms of a Joint Declaration signed with Britain in 1984.In a TV interview, Mr. Clegg added that he planned to convey his alarm to the ambassador “at the way in which the Chinese authorities in Beijing seem determined to refuse to give to the people of Hong Kong what they are perfectly entitled to expect, which is free, fair, open elections based on universal suffrage.“I think it should help if, not only countries like Britain, but other countries say very clearly to the Chinese authorities that it is in their interests that Hong Kong remains a stable and prosperous part of the wider nation of China,” he said.Mr. Clegg added that universal suffrage should mean the right for citizens to vote “for the candidates they want,” and not “for candidates that have been screened and preselected by the authorities in Beijing.”The meeting with the ambassador was expected to take place this week, said an aide to Mr. Clegg who asked not to be identified, in line with British government policy.