A judge in Bahrain ordered the immediate detention of a prominent opposition activist who tore up a photograph of the nation’s king, the dissident’s lawyer told Reuters on Wednesday.The activist, Zainab al-Khawaja, was arrested on Tuesday after she ripped up a picture of King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa during a court hearing related to charges that she had insulted the monarch in exactly the same way in 2012.
            After 2ًmonths of imprisonment activist zainab alkhawaja join sanabis protesters N tearing pic of hamad
#KingsTornPics pic.twitter.com/YuetC2IA According to the Gulf Center for Human Rights, Ms. Khawaja destroyed the king’s image in front of the judge after paying tribute to her jailed father, Abdulhadi al-Khawaja, one of eight opposition leaders sentenced to life in prison by a special security court for “plotting to topple the government” through pro-democracy demonstrations in 2011.“I am the daughter of a proud and free man,” Ms. Khawaja told the judge, according to her sister, Maryam. “My mother brought me into this world free,” she continued, “and I will give birth to a free baby boy even if it is inside our prisons. It is my right, and my responsibility as a free person, to protest against oppression and oppressors.” She then ripped up another photograph of King Hamad and was arrested.Ms. Khawaja, who is more than eight months pregnant, now faces seven days of pretrial detention and the prospect of up to seven years in prison for insulting the king in public.
            Zainab Alkhawaja just got 7 days detention on the charge of publicly insulting Hamad Alkhalifa, carries sentencw between 1-7 yrs #Bahrain Writing on her popular @AngryArabiya Twitter feed in 2012, Ms. Khawaja defended the act of ripping up the king’s picture as a legitimate form of peaceful protest against the monarchy.
            I believe tearing up pictures of a criminal dictator is a legitimate method of peaceful resistance #Bahrain #KingsTornPics 
            Hamad is a criminal dictator responsible for killing, torturing, and detaining innocent Bahrainis #Bahrain #KingsTornPics 
            Tearing up Hamads pics is 1 way for us to remind him & the world that we do no accept him as the king of our country #Bahrain #KingsTornPics 
            .. that we will fight for the day when Hamad will be put on trial for all the crimes he committed against the ppl of #Bahrain #KingsTornPics 
            I spent 2 months in prison for tearing up Hamads pics, and I will do it again. And again... #Bahrain #KingsTornPics Maryam al-Khawaja and a group of activists from the Index on Censorship in London called Wednesday for the release of her sister and father and other political prisoners, including Nabeel Rajab, the president of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights.
#freenabeel #freezainab #freealkhawaja #freenaji @MARYAMALKHAWAJA at @indexcensorship to talk about #bahrain pic.twitter.com/l6VWx89T7O Mr. Rajab was arrested earlier this month and charged with insulting the nation’s interior ministry in a Twitter comment inspired by reports that a police officer had left the kingdom to join the Islamic State militant group in Syria.
            many #Bahrain men who joined #terrorism & #ISIS came from security institutions and those institutions were the first ideological incubator        As Human Rights Watch explained, Mr. Rajab — who was jailed in 2012 for criticizing the government on Twitter — was referring to evidence that Mohamed Isa al Binali, a former officer with Bahrain’s interior ministry, had joined the militant group. The officer had reportedly boasted of his role with the group on Twitter before his account was suspended, and appeared in a YouTube clip urging other members of the security force to defect.After initially refusing to comment, Bahrain’s interior ministry cryptically announced in September that the officer had been fired.
            Former officer Mohammed Isa Al Binali was terminated from employment for failure to appear at work #Bahrain Earlier this week, Bahraini activists took part in a campaign of solidarity with Mr. Rajab by making exactly the same assertion on their own Twitter accounts.
            many #Bahrain men who joined #terrorism & #ISIS came from security institutions and those institutions were the first ideological incubator        
            many #Bahrain men who joined #terrorism & #ISIS came from security institutions and those institutions were the first ideological incubator        
            many #Bahrain men who joined #terrorism & #ISIS came from security institutions & those institutions were the first ideological incubator        
            I just tweeted the same exact tweet that #humanrights defender @NABEELRAJAB was arrested for. #ArrestMeWithNabeel!
#FreeSpeech #Bahrain Although Bahrain’s Sunni Muslim monarch is an American ally in the aerial campaign against the Islamic State, and the Persian Gulf state is home to the United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet, its crackdown on dissent has been frequently criticized by the State Department.In July, Bahrain appeared to retaliate by ordering the senior United States official on human rights to leave the country after he met with the nation’s main Shiite opposition group.