HONG KONG —  A Hong Kong lawmaker who broke ranks with his pro-Beijing allies by calling last week for the resignation of the city’s top official faces expulsion from a prestigious Chinese government advisory panel as punishment for his disloyalty, his brother said Tuesday.The lawmaker, James Tien, the leader of the Liberal Party, is set to be expelled from the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference for not supporting its resolutions, which include backing Hong Kong’s government, Mr. Tien’s brother, Michael, said in a telephone interview.The body’s standing committee will meet Wednesday to vote on the issue, said Michael Tien, also a Hong Kong lawmaker.“The oath made when being appointed is that they would vow to uphold all the resolutions made by the standing committee of the C.P.P.C.C.,” said Michael Tien, a delegate to China’s legislature, the National People’s Congress. “So they considered him as not honoring his oath.”The swift response is a signal that Beijing backs Leung Chun-ying, Hong Kong’s chief executive, even as public support for him dwindles during student-led pro-democracy protests. Mr. Leung’s handling of the demonstrations, which have occupied busy avenues of the city, has been heavily criticized by democracy advocates, many of whom are calling for his resignation.James Tien echoed that sentiment on Friday, saying in a radio  interview that Mr. Leung’s leadership had been poor. It was the first time a prominent member of the pro-business establishment had called for Mr. Leung to quit.Michael Tien said that there were “corridors of discontent” in Beijing over Mr. Leung’s performance, but that officials thought it was important to support him because if he were removed, it would be a contravention of the “one country, two systems” model promised to Hong Kong when it returned to Chinese rule in 1997 after more than 150 years as a British colony.“They are supporting C. Y. because they are supporting the system and structure,” Michael Tien said, referring to Mr. Leung.A report in Sing Tao Daily, a local newspaper, also said the body’s standing committee would meet Wednesday to vote on the expulsion. The body, which advises the National People’s Congress, comprises over 2,000 delegates drawn from a broad range of society, including many billionaire executives but also Buddhist monks, professional athletes, scientists, soldiers and professors.Under China’s Leninist system, they must share one trait: loyalty to the central government led by the Communist Party. Members serve five-year terms and can be reappointed. Hong Kong runs most of its internal affairs but still sends delegates to the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference and the National People’s Congress. Hong Kong’s delegation represents the elite of the government’s supporters.Michael Tien said that members of the body were free to voice their opposition to policies before a decision was made, but that afterward, they had to support the choice.“Whether you think this is right or wrong, this is the oath that you made,” he said.James Tien, 67, has a reputation as a maverick. In 2003, he withdrew the Liberal Party’s support of a government-backed security bill, ensuring its defeat.Michael Tien said his brother might be able to keep his status as a member of the so-called pro-establishment camp in Hong Kong and not be viewed as a member of the opposition. James Tien did not return a phone call and an email seeking comment.Mr. Leung, 60, stirred a new controversy last week when he told The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal and The Financial Times that allowing lower-income people equal representation in elections would lead to a “numbers game” that would skew “politics and policies” in favor of lower-income groups.Those remarks have been pilloried by the pro-democracy demonstrators. On Tuesday, Mr. Leung said he regretted that his remarks had caused misunderstanding, The South China Morning Post reported.