TEL AVIV — Simmering tension between Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel and one of his right-wing political partners boiled into open hostility on Wednesday, threatening to reshape Israel’s governing coalition at a critical juncture of the American-brokered peace talks with the Palestinians.The prime minister’s office issued a warning on Wednesday morning to Naftali Bennett, the leader of the religious-nationalist Jewish Home party, that if Mr. Bennett did not apologize for his harsh criticism of Mr. Netanyahu’s positions in recent days, he could lose his seat in the cabinet.“There is an expectation that he will apologize,” said an official in Mr. Netanyahu’s office, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to talk to reporters. “The prime minister has coalition alternatives.”Mr. Bennett, 41, had delivered repeated, blistering denunciations over the past few days of a suggestion by the prime minister’s office that some Jews in far-flung settlements might live under Palestinian sovereignty in a future peace deal. Hours after Mr. Netanyahu’s office issued its ultimatum, Mr. Bennett said, “If the prime minister was offended, that was not my intention.” But he stood by the substance of his statements and did not explicitly apologize.“I respect Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his leadership in not-simple conditions,” Mr. Bennett said at a conference of religious-nationalist leaders near the Dead Sea. “I support him when it is needed, and I criticize him when it is needed. That is my duty.”He added, “Imposing Palestinian sovereignty over Israeli citizens is dangerous, and it was my duty to remove this idea immediately from our agenda, and it has been removed.”The prime minister’s office did not immediately respond to inquiries about whether Mr. Bennett’s statement would suffice.The flap highlights political dynamics in Israel that many analysts see as a potentially fatal obstacle to any peace deal. Mr. Netanyahu’s coalition partners have profound ideological differences regarding the establishment of a Palestinian state, and the prime minister’s own willingness to compromise on issues like the future of Jerusalem and the fate of Palestinian refugees remains an open question.The cracks in the coalition came as Secretary of State John Kerry prepared to present a “framework” laying out core principles for continuing the negotiations, which began last summer. Mr. Bennett has said he will quit the coalition if Israel signs a document that calls for a Palestinian state to be established along the 1967 lines with East Jerusalem as its capital, as it is expected to do.But two other coalition partners — Tzipi Livni, the justice minister, who is leading the negotiations, and Yair Lapid, the centrist finance minister — are likely to leave the government if Israel does not continue to support Mr. Kerry’s initiative. Mr. Lapid warned in a speech here Wednesday that if the talks fail, a European boycott could ensue that would cost Israel about $5.7 billion, threatening 9,800 jobs, and “substantially hurt the checkbook of every Israeli.”Mr. Netanyahu, whose stated support of a two-state solution also faces deep opposition from within his own Likud Party, distanced himself from Mr. Kerry’s framework on Tuesday, saying, “Israel does not have to agree with everything America presents.”The leader of the Labor Party has promised Mr. Netanyahu a “safety net” to pursue peace with the Palestinians, but it is unclear whether, if Mr. Bennett were pushed out, the party would agree to join the coalition before a framework was presented or signed. The ultra-Orthodox Shas Party, long a political partner to Mr. Netanyahu but not a member of the current coalition, might also join, depending on what happens with a plan to draft more yeshiva students into the Israeli Army.Recent polls have shown that Mr. Netanyahu faces no serious challenge for the premiership, and that if new elections are held, Likud and its ally, Yisrael Beiteinu, are most likely to gain seats. Some analysts see this as an opportunity for Mr. Netanyahu to force a break from the extreme pro-settler wing of Likud and move to the center, perhaps even by forming a new party, an Israeli political pastime.“Netanyahu on one hand is trying to show he has options,” said Gideon Rahat, a political scientist at Hebrew University and a researcher at the Israel Democracy Institute. “But his main problem was and remains with the Likud. The party is very right-wing and will make it difficult for him to reach an agreement, if that’s what he wants.”Mr. Bennett, who made a fortune in Israel’s technology industry, was once Mr. Netanyahu’s top aide, but they parted unhappily. Mr. Netanyahu was forced to include the Jewish Home party in the governing coalition because Mr. Bennett partnered with Mr. Lapid, but that relationship has frayed: Mr. Bennett and Mr. Lapid used to refer to each other as brothers, but have lately downgraded to cousins.The conflict escalated over the weekend, when the prime minister’s office floated the notion of Jewish settlers’ becoming minority citizens in a future Palestinian state. The idea was roundly criticized by Palestinians, settlers, Likud members and center-left politicians alike. Mr. Bennett said it reflected “the loss of a moral compass,” and on Tuesday night broadened his attack, declaring, “Our forefathers and ancestors and our descendants will never forgive an Israeli leader who gives away our land and divides our capital.”Several members of the Likud publicly criticized Mr. Bennett on Wednesday, questioning his maturity and asking why he remained in the government if he did not support its policies.Danny Danon, the chairman of the Likud Central Committee and a leader of the party’s far-right ranks, agreed that Mr. Bennett’s tone was inappropriate but said he supported “the content of what he said,” and hinted at a looming political challenge for Mr. Netanyahu.“I think what should be done is say it very clearly — ‘We will not abandon our brothers and sisters in Judea and Samaria’ — but at the same time not to make it personal,” Mr. Danon said in an interview, using the biblical names for the West Bank. “I think Prime Minister Netanyahu knows it very clearly that if he wants to advance this policy and this idea, it will not pass within his own party.”