When the baritone Thomas Hampson sings “The Star-Spangled Banner” at the Library of Congress in Washington on Thursday, it won’t sound quite like the familiar tune belted out at ball games and presidential inaugurations.A sprightly lilt will replace the usual slow waltz. A jaunty pickup will substitute for the stately descent of “O say.” The last two lines of each verse will be echoed by a septet of singers.In short, it is how the anthem might have sounded 200 years ago, when Francis Scott Key wrote new lyrics to an old British melody aboard a ship in Baltimore’s harbor.“Key wouldn’t really recognize what we sing today,” said the musicologist Mark Clague in a joint Skype interview with Mr. Hampson. “It’s missing a phrase of music, it’s at the wrong tempo, it’s much slower, it’s sung by a massed group of people instead of an individual soloist,” he added. A professor at the University of Michigan, Dr. Clague would know: He heads Star Spangled Music, an initiative celebrating the anthem’s bicentennial. While the actual anniversary is Sept. 14, Mr. Hampson’s recital allows for a Fourth of July tie-in.“I hope that we can be part of something this year that reinvigorates a real connection to where this song came from, other than the obligatory tune that one sings before somebody throws a pitch,” Mr. Hampson said.There was nothing obligatory about the early history of “The Star-Spangled Banner.” Behind Key’s words lay a melody — the so-called Anacreontic Song — endlessly adaptable to the causes of its day, from the French Revolution to abolition to temperance and women’s rights. Only in the last century has the anthem’s tune become inextricably connected to Key’s lyrics, and the lyrics to the sturdy patriotism of baseball and flag raising.The early struggle over the tune’s meaning will be captured in Mr. Hampson’s recital. “We will really tell the story of this song becoming so emblematic and, then eventually, officially, our national anthem, through its own story — its own broadsides, its own lyrics,” he said.For those unable to attend, that tale is audible on “Poets & Patriots,” a CD set that includes nearly 30 versions of the Anacreontic Song. There is also a forthcoming Star Spangled Songbook, with scores ready for performance. (New Yorkers can hear one of them, a Toscanini arrangement of the anthem, at the New York Philharmonic’s Star-Spangled Celebration concerts at Avery Fisher Hall next weekend.)Star Spangled Music mainly focuses on K-12 educational projects teaching the history of the anthem. But it also tries to correct popular misconceptions — like the widespread assumption that the tune originated as a drinking song.“To Anacreon in Heaven,” as the melody was first known, had its debut around 1776 at a meeting of the Anacreontic Society, an amateur gentlemen’s music club in London. The song served as an after-dinner transition between a professional orchestral concert and participatory group singing. The society’s president wrote the original lyrics, an ode to the jovial Greek poet Anacreon. A trained tenor would perform the tune as a virtuoso set piece, with the conclusion of each refrain repeated heartily by the society’s members.“It’s not a drinking song in the way its reputation would lead people to believe, in the sense of a pub ditty,” Dr. Clague said. “You had to have a harpsichord and four-part harmony, so it just doesn’t work very well in a pub.”Its alcoholic repute was in part due to moralistic protests against the tune during the Prohibition era, when Congress was deciding whether to make it the official national anthem. Battling over the meaning of “The Star-Spangled Banner” is an essential — if overlooked — part of the song’s tradition.The Anacreontic Song was well known in the early American republic — most famously as “Adams and Liberty,” an impassioned defense of the second president. In 1793, an American Francophile published a new text for the song supporting the French Revolution; another writer countered with a version that suggested hanging the French ambassador.Key was familiar with the tune before he wrote the “Star-Spangled” verses, having already refashioned it as a paean to American naval heroics in 1805. Nine years later, stuck on a ship after negotiating the release of a prisoner, Key watched the British overnight siege of Baltimore during the War of 1812. When he saw the American flag still waving at dawn — an improbable victory — Key penned the stirring “Defense of Fort M’Henry,” with a rhyme scheme matched to the Anacreontic Song.Within a week, the lyrics were printed in Baltimore newspapers, with an indication that they be paired to the familiar British melody. Key supervised a full musical arrangement by the composer and publisher Thomas Carr — issued as “The Star-Spangled Banner” — which Mr. Hampson will sing on Thursday.About a dozen copies of the Carr arrangement are known to exist. One is on display at the Morgan Library & Museum in Manhattan through Sept. 7. Another is held by the Library of Congress, an institution entwined with the history of the anthem, which has an exhibition about the song running through July 7. “In many ways the story of the research into ‘The Star-Spangled Banner’ is the story of the music division of the Library of Congress,” Dr. Clague said.In 1907, Oscar Sonneck — the music division’s first chief — began a full investigation of the anthem’s history. His scrupulous report raised as many questions about the song’s history as it answered: Sonneck urged his readers not to “accept a single statement of fact or argument unless the evidence submitted compels him to do so.”Sonneck couldn’t conclusively identify the composer of the Anacreontic Song, then a musicological riddle. A later congressional librarian believed it was a military tune of obscure origins; others attributed it to Samuel Arnold, who had published a volume of Anacreontic melodies. Only in the 1970s did the librarian William Lichtenwanger — following the chance discovery of a diary entry hidden in a 10-volume manuscript — successfully attribute the tune to the composer John Stafford Smith, a hired hand who never actually joined the Anacreontic Society.Perhaps more intriguing than the song’s origin, though, is its multifaceted and contentious American development. “It’s really sort of an amazing story of how the song has grown up alongside the country: You can really trace the history of the United States in the echoes of ‘The Star-Spangled Banner,’ ” Dr. Clague said.Not until 1931 was it officially declared the national anthem. In the 19th century, the tune was regularly refashioned with lyrics to be, alternately, a rallying cry for abolitionists (“Oh, say do you hear, at the dawn’s early light, The shrieks of those bondmen, whose blood is now streaming”) or a temperance-movement indictment of alcohol (“Oh! who has not seen by the dawn’s early light, Some poor bloated drunkard to his home weakly reeling”).“What is fascinating is just to revisit the use of text and words — how much information about social issues is being communicated in the text that wandered with the same melody but through different mutations and given different contexts,” Mr. Hampson said. “Quite frankly, the issues fall under what we would call human rights.”Despite its initial wave of popularity, for several decades “The Star-Spangled Banner” ranked third behind “Hail Columbia” and “Yankee Doodle” as the default musical expression of national fervor. In the early days of the Civil War, the North and South both claimed the anthem — Key was, after all, a Maryland slave owner. Only during Reconstruction did it emerge as the predominant American hymn, entrenched by its association with flag-raising ceremonies practiced during the war.Complaints about the tune have remained mostly the same since that era — it’s foreign, it’s hard to sing, the words are not easy to remember. But even if the highest notes on “land of the free” are difficult to reach, the anthem’s hot-blooded history elevates it to the level of American iconography — a reminder that partisanship is crucial to democracy. For Dr. Clague, it is a testament that “the song is a verb, and citizenship is a verb, and that these are part of a process of identity negotiation.”“When people sing it, and when they put their whole heart and passion behind the song, they give voice to their own citizenship in a way that speaks of their vision of the country,” Dr. Clague said. If diva performances of the anthem by Beyoncé or Renée Fleming don’t quite embrace that ethos of national introspection, perhaps resurrecting the tune’s original multiplicity of meanings might.Dr. Clague and Mr. Hampson, however, don’t want to overturn today’s patriotic conventions. “I actually very much like our crazy tradition of the last 25 or 30 years of various genius contemporary pop musicians taking this tune and this moment, and turning it into something uniquely theirs at different events,” Mr. Hampson said. “I’m actually very amused and sometimes deeply moved.”And among other research interests, Dr. Clague has long been fascinated by Jimi Hendrix’s famously unorthodox 1969 Woodstock rendition. “When you see the song as something that’s in the process of always becoming,” he said, “you realize that it is our country — made audible.”