He played drums as a teenager for the St. Joseph’s Brigade, a Catholic fife, drum and bugle corps. He fondly recalls singing along to his mother’s 45s while he and his seven siblings cleaned their childhood home in Astoria, Queens. (“Top of the World,” by the Carpenters was a favorite.)And as a fan of musicals, he notes that a high point of his 2010 inauguration into the City Council was a student rendition of “Somewhere,” from “West Side Story.”Still, Jimmy Van Bramer does not have the standard résumé for someone who has emerged as an important cultural figure in New York City.No music school degree. No time spent as a corporate bigwig on a major cultural board. No parents with an outspoken passion for the arts.Nonetheless, as chairman of the Cultural Affairs Committee — and now majority leader — Mr. Van Bramer has carved out a niche as the Council’s champion of the arts, one whom cultural organizations have come to rely on as they press their agenda forward with a new administration.Some of his influence comes from his close ties to Council Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito, and Mayor Bill de Blasio, who served with him on the Progressive Caucus. On Monday, Mr. de Blasio embraced the advice of Mr. Van Bramer and others in selecting Tom Finkelpearl, the executive director and president of the Queens Museum, as cultural affairs commissioner.“Van Bramer’s been a player,” said Karen Brooks Hopkins, the president of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.It was Mr. Van Bramer who last month announced the city’s designation of part of Astoria as the Kaufman Arts District, to promote the area as a cultural hub.Last week, he organized a meeting where leaders of cultural organizations got to speak with Ms. Mark-Viverito.“Jimmy gets how we’re more than just paintings on a wall,” said Lynn Kelly, the president and chief executive of Snug Harbor Cultural Center & Botanical Garden on Staten Island, who attended. “We’re de facto community centers, we’re job centers, we have purchasing power, we foster and incubate other nonprofits. He’s now helping to educate other council members and bring them into the fold.”Several days later, during a breakfast at the Metropolitan Museum of Art to welcome new Council members, Mr. Van Bramer’s rapport with the museum’s leadership was evident.“We feel very well served by Jimmy,” said Emily K. Rafferty, the Met’s president, afterward.Though former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has been gone only a few months, the landscape for cultural organizations in the city has changed. Mr. Bloomberg advanced culture by investing city capital funds and making his own private contributions to arts organizations. Mr. de Blasio’s priorities have been less clear because culture was not a major issue in his campaign.“The arts are not as they were with Mayor Bloomberg, front of mind,” said Virginia P. Louloudes, the executive director of the Alliance of Resident Theaters/New York. “Having the majority leader of the City Council, who chairs the arts committee, having the arts front of mind is critical — especially one who has the ear of the speaker of the City Council and the mayor.”Mr. Van Bramer, 44, outgoing and openly ambitious, said that as majority leader, he now has something of a bully pulpit.“I’m going to use that access and power to amplify, not just my voice, but all of the cultural community,” he said.The case for culture may have to be made differently now. While Mr. Bloomberg’s team promoted culture as driving tourism and tax dollars, the argument most likely to resonate with a de Blasio administration is that the arts can be a lifeline for disadvantaged children.“Some are tempted to reduce the arts to an economic engine,” Mr. de Blasio said in his remarks on Monday at the Queens Museum as he announced Mr. Finkelpearl’s appointment. “But first and foremost, it’s a moral grounding for the city of New York, part of why we’re as great as we are. You can’t have a flourishing democracy without a strong cultural sector.”Mr. Van Bramer said he understood the change in focus and hit the theme of open access to the arts at the breakfast last week for new Council Members in the Metropolitan Museum’s galleries for the Arts of Africa, Oceania and the Americas.“You can’t put a dollar value on a child from southeast Queens walking through halls like this and seeing their minds open,” he said. “This is our moment to make sure we do that for every borough, every community.”Mr. Van Bramer grew up in the district he now represents. His father was a pressman for The New York Times, his mother a Pathmark cashier. He recalled how his interest in the arts developed in school — on field trips to the Queens Museum; learning “There’s No Business Like Show Business” in Mrs. Fischbein’s class at P.S. 70 in Astoria.Before his election, he worked in community and government relations at the Queens Library for more than a decade, serving under the library’s president and chief executive, Thomas W. Galante, who is now under investigation for possible misuse of funds. Before a recent Cultural Affairs Committee hearing on the library’s finances, a Council member asked Mr. Van Bramer if it was appropriate for him to lead the session. Mr. Van Bramer replied, “Who are you to question my integrity?”Last week, he backed Queens Borough President Melinda Katz’s call for Mr. Galante to take a temporary leave, given, he said, “the gravity of the ongoing investigations.”For four years, Mr. Van Bramer has led the Cultural Affairs Committee, long a backwater in the Council power structure. But Domenic M. Recchia Jr., who preceded Mr. Van Bramer as chairman, is widely credited with elevating its profile. Many say Mr. Van Bramer took it the next step.“He gave it a more focused presence,” Ms. Hopkins said. “The cultural committee, which before was nonexistent in any significant way, has now become much more desirable — it has more substance, it has more clout, it has more prestige.”Mr. Van Bramer’s clout is still more evident in his district. People credit him with helping to create a vital dance program at P.S. 111 in Queens. He reached out to Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, which then established an after-school program there.Esau Chauca, the executive director of the Ayazamana Cultural Center, which promotes Ecuadorean arts in Queens, said Mr. Van Bramer was essential in securing financing last year for the center.“Now I get to do that for the whole city,” Mr. Van Bramer said. “I get to do that for millions.”