Fed up with dysfunctional public officials? With politics altogether? Even given up on voting? Then do yourself a favor and read Richard Ravitch’s inspiring “So Much to Do: A Full Life of Business, Politics and Confronting Fiscal Crises” (PublicAffairs).Overlook the title. This is no wonky, self-serving screed. Nor is it a gossipy, score-settling vindication — though, reading between the lines, you can parse keen insights into the machinations of, among others, former Mayor Edward I. Koch and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.Rather, “So Much to Do” gracefully synthesizes a serendipitous memoir illustrating the education of a public man; an enlightening, prescriptive citizen’s manual into making government work; and a passionate “ode to democracy” (as Mr. Ravitch’s friend Paul A. Volcker calls it in his blurb on the back cover) into a remarkably accessible book.“It amazes me that seemingly disconnected experiences and relationships converged in ways that helped me address the public challenges described in this book,” Mr. Ravitch writes.His relationships included those with public figures like Joseph A. Califano Jr., the former secretary of health, education and welfare; Bayard Rustin, the civil rights leader; Albert Shanker, the teachers’ union leader; and Hugh L. Carey, the former governor.The experiences encompass bailing out the state’s Urban Development Corporation (through means that would become the model for rescuing New York City from its subsequent fiscal crisis), Co-op City, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the Bowery Savings Bank; building affordable housing; fundamentally revising the City Charter; briefly lending gravitas to the administration of Gov. David A. Paterson as lieutenant governor (a post, like his quarters in Albany, that was “elaborate and empty”); and, most recently, applying the lessons learned in Albany to faltering state finances across the country (going so far as to volunteer last month to help oversee Detroit’s transition from bankruptcy).We get whiffs of raw politics. See how Mr. Ravitch (whom I’ve covered and known for decades) tweaks the judicial process to save the Transport Workers Union from a crippling fine, or how he says Mr. Cuomo frets that if Mr. Ravitch replaces Mr. Paterson as governor, he will appoint a black lieutenant who might have challenged Mr. Cuomo for the nomination for governor in 2010.The challenges are finding the leadership to avoid, in Mr. Ravitch’s favorite metaphor, kicking the can down the road, especially in the absence of crisis, and “the question of how a free society can reduce benefits for some and increase burdens for others without tearing unacceptably at the social fabric.” In the end, he argues persuasively, “In a democracy, if you insist on being above politics, you cannot govern well.”Given the book’s title, breadth and sheer heft, few reviews (let alone a capsule version) could do justice to Donald L. Miller’s latest triumph, “Supreme City: How Jazz Age Manhattan Gave Birth to Modern America” (Simon & Schuster).Don’t let its tonnage intimidate you. Professor Miller, who teaches history at Lafayette College in Easton, Pa., elegantly introduces one vivid character after another to recreate a vital and archetypical era when, as Duke Ellington declared, the whole world revolved around New York.“A new capitalist culture gained dominance in America in the 1920s, one based on consumption, spending and enjoyment, rather than production, savings and self-denial,” Professor Miller writes. And New York was the capital of everything.