WASHINGTON —  When a visibly angry Senator Marco Rubio of Florida emerged as the face of hard-line Republican opposition to President Obama’s new outreach to Cuba, he swept political calculations aside.“I don’t care if the polls say that 99 percent of people believe we should normalize relations in Cuba,” said Mr. Rubio, who grew up in Miami and is the son of Cuban immigrants.Within the coming months, Mr. Rubio, a likely presidential candidate, will find out on just which side of the polls — and history — he stands. On Thursday, he got his first brush with an opposing view when Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky and a likely 2016 contender, endorsed Mr. Obama’s move to normalize relations with Cuba as “probably a good idea.”The distance between their positions forms the contours of a debate within the party that will play out when Congress reconvenes under Republican control in January, and into the 2016 campaign. Jeb Bush, the former Republican governor of Florida, and Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, joined Mr. Rubio in criticizing the president. Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey declined to comment.Though a tough position on Cuba has long been common among politicians hoping to woo the Cuban-American vote in Florida, polls show that much of the country, and even young Cuban-Americans in Florida, increasingly favors rapprochement with the island nation 90 miles south.Mr. Rubio has long been a hawk when it comes to dealing with countries like China, Iran and Venezuela — a worldview shaped by his experiences as the child of Cuban immigrants. His vocal stance has helped make him the most prominent Republican opposing the president on this issue.But that position also comes with risks.“There is a fine line between passionate principle and tone-deaf intransigence,” said Fernand Amandi, managing partner of Bendixen & Amandi International, a Miami-based opinion-research and strategic-communications firm. “On the issue he thinks he’s most knowledgeable about, he runs the risk of being rendered dead wrong if this new approach accelerates change and democracy to Cuba. That’s a hell of a risk, especially for someone who fancies himself a foreign policy expert.”It is a risk Mr. Rubio is more than willing to take.As soon as Wednesday’s news broke, Mr. Rubio seemed ubiquitous, delaying his trip back to Florida to convene a news conference in the Capitol; penning an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal that declared the president’s policy “a victory for oppression”; and making more than a dozen television appearances criticizing the new White House policy.He promised to use his perch as the incoming chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere to hold up funding for an embassy in Cuba and the nomination of an ambassador there.On Thursday, at another news conference in Miami, Mr. Rubio called the agreement a “disaster,” a pact made in the vain hope that “somehow from this will spring democracy.” Mr. Rubio had an ally in Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Republican of Florida, who said, “We’re just so deeply anguished and horrified by this decision.”Many leaders in the Republican Party seemed willing to let Mr. Rubio become the public face of the fight against the Obama administration, with Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the incoming majority leader, calling him “a Cuban-American expert.”“I’m very likely to be following his lead,” Mr. McConnell said.But Mr. Rubio’s views put him out of step with some agricultural interests, as well as with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which said it stood “ready to assist as the Cuban people work to unleash the power of free enterprise to improve their lives.”“You have some of the strangest people who have been calling for lifting the embargo: Iowa farmers to the Chamber of Commerce,” said Eduardo Gamarra, a professor of politics and international relations at Florida International University. “You have people saying, ‘Look, the Cold War ended 25 years ago.’ ”Even the Vatican released a statement praising the news, and Pope Francis helped in negotiating a key part of the deal: the release of Alan P. Gross, an American imprisoned in Cuba for five years. Mr. Rubio on Wednesday was careful to say that he, too, supported Mr. Gross’s release, but urged “His Holiness to take up the cause of freedom and democracy.”And some, particularly Cuban-Americans, agree with Mr. Rubio’s hard-line approach to Cuba. “I don’t think anyone is going to confuse Castro’s Cuba with Disneyland anytime soon,” said Alex Castellanos, a Republican strategist and Cuban immigrant.“I don’t think there’s the slightest political downside to Rubio here being who he is,” Mr. Castellanos said. “There’s a certain weakness and naïveté to this president, so I think posting up against this is not only good politics but good government for Rubio.”Even younger Cuban-Americans who might disagree with Mr. Rubio, Mr. Castellanos added, are not necessarily going to penalize him for staking out the same ground as their parents and grandparents. “It would be like penalizing your parents,” he said.And Mr. Rubio showed no signs of curbing his passion. “This deal the president has come up with is a terrible trade-off,” Mr. Rubio said. “In the words of Raúl Castro himself, Cuba has agreed to nothing. This is the kind of deal you get when you send your speechwriter to negotiate with a tyrant.”