Like most seasoned conductors, Zubin Mehta has built his reputation on interpretations of a core repertory, in his case the music of Romantic-era giants like Bruckner, Tchaikovsky and Mahler. But on tour with the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, an ensemble that named him music director for life in 1981, he is increasingly in demand for his exegesis of a long-winded drama fueled by high passions of a different kind: Middle East politics.“I have such a love for this country, Israel, that I see it as a tragedy what’s going on,” the Mumbai-born Mr. Mehta, now 77, said recently at the Pierre Hotel, a few blocks from Carnegie Hall, where he will conduct an Israel Philharmonic benefit concert on Thursday. “I speak openly about a country that I see, from my private musician’s perspective, as going in the wrong direction, as far as the settlements, as far as internal economic policies. But they know I’m a friend. And being in a democracy, I express my opinions freely.”Mr. Mehta’s frank comments stand in contrast to the reluctance of some of his colleagues. At a Times Talk last week the Venezuelan conductor Gustavo Dudamel was visibly uncomfortable when pressed on the subject of protests in his country that have been met with steely repression by a government that in many ways fostered his early career. “I condemn strongly violence, wherever it’s coming from,” was one guarded comment, though he also asserted “the right of people to protest.”Then there is the Russian conductor Valery Gergiev, who has campaigned for the re-election of President Vladimir V. Putin and who was among the signatories of an open letter supporting the president’s position on Crimea. In 2008, Mr. Gergiev gave a concert in support of South Ossetia’s secession from Georgia, in which he drew parallels between the city’s shelling by Georgian troops to the siege of Leningrad in World War II. Yet in the West, he neither defends nor comments on Russian policies and refuses to be drawn on the subject of the country’s recent curtailment of gay rights — despite protests at recent appearances of his in New York.But protests like those — last fall Mr. Gergiev was heckled by gay rights activists at the opening night of the Metropolitan Opera and at a Carnegie Hall, where he led the Mariinsky Orchestra — show how politicized classical music can be, and how its stars are now often expected to take a stand.Mr. Mehta is happy to oblige — as are, with different points of view, the Israeli-Argentine conductor Daniel Barenboim and the Russian-born pianist Evgeny Kissin, who recently took on Israeli citizenship.“I’m a very involved person,” said Mr. Mehta, who is not Jewish and continues to hold Indian citizenship. “Many of my colleagues are not. But I have my own opinions about what goes on and what should happen.”Often these opinions are backed up by anecdotes that now belong to an increasingly distant past. Mr. Mehta is fond of recalling how, in 1978, he urged the prime minister of Israel, Menachem Begin, to send the orchestra to Cairo as a gesture of good will after the signing of the peace accords. “He didn’t react at all,” Mr. Mehta said. “But that would have been the time to do it.”He also remembers a personal invitation extended by King Hussein to bring the Israel Philharmonic to Jordan. Mr. Mehta said that Queen Noor, “who was very gracious,” subsequently retracted the invitation when the right-wing Likud Party under Benjamin Netanyahu came to power in Israel in 1996. “She had her own festival at the time at the Dead Sea, and she said, ‘I would love for you to play there, but since you have a new government with Netanyahu, my husband would like to see how things are going.’ And we never heard from them again.”Unlike the Israeli musicians of the Israel Philharmonic, Mr. Mehta is able to travel to the Palestinian territories and often visits Ramallah in the West Bank: “With my Indian passport, I have no problem,” he said. “We have an ambassador there, and he sends his car.” There, his encounters with Palestinian intellectuals confirm his faith in the need for a continued peace process. “They are waiting for a solution,” he said.Yet despite such statements, Mr. Mehta’s appearances with the Israel Philharmonic continue to get picketed by pro-Palestinian protesters. In the United States, Mr. Mehta said, it is most often in college towns that the orchestra encounters such demonstrations outside a venue, but there were also protests outside Carnegie Hall and the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles in 2011.The most uncomfortable incident for the orchestra, Mr. Mehta said, came during the London Proms that year, when clusters of well-organized pro-Palestinian hecklers infiltrated the audience and disturbed the performance with shouting and singing. “We were playing the ‘Passacaglia’ by Webern, which is an introverted, quiet piece,” Mr. Mehta recalled. “I could hardly hear the orchestra playing, they were so loud. And the audience got furious at the demonstrators, started screaming at them.”The furor was mild compared with that preceding a concert Mr. Mehta conducted last September in Kashmir, a region disputed by India and Pakistan. There, Muslim separatists threatened attacks and intimidated the Kashmiri musicians who were going to perform with the orchestra of the Bavarian State Opera, another ensemble long associated with Mr. Mehta.The concert went ahead under heavy police protection. Critics — some reviewers, some among the German musicians — noted that the audience of Hindus and Muslims was almost entirely made up of V.I.P.s. Still, Mr. Mehta said, “it was nationally televised, and in Kashmir itself, 70 percent of the people saw that concert. It was a soul-stirring experience for me, and I have offered to go again next year and play in a larger venue so that more people can go.”But classical music in India is not as politically charged as it is in Israel. In no other country do performances of music by a long-dead composer become the subject of parliamentary debate, as is the case with Wagner, whose posthumous adoption by the Nazis touches a deep wound in the Israeli collective consciousness.The Israel Philharmonic was founded on the eve of World War II, when the Polish star violinist Bronislaw Huberman, with equal parts prescience and organizational genius, auditioned leading Jewish musicians across Europe and procured them lifesaving jobs in the ensemble that started out as the Palestine Orchestra in 1936 — the year Mr. Mehta was born. When he first conducted the orchestra in 1961, its ranks still included some of those founding musicians.“I spoke mostly German with them,” Mr. Mehta said. (His own fluent German goes back to his student days at the Vienna Music Academy.) As the founding generation reached retirement age, an influx of immigrants from the Soviet Union, many of them highly accomplished string players, left their mark on the orchestra. “Suddenly, overnight, the technical level rose,” Mr. Mehta said. In recent years, he said, he has noticed a new trend: “The last rounds of auditions were all won by Sabras,” he said, using the Hebrew term for native Israelis. The orchestra also has a smattering of Americans, including a principal horn player who is not Jewish.But there are as yet no Arab Israeli members of the orchestra, and Mr. Mehta has thrown his weight behind an educational project run by members of the Israel Philharmonic that fosters talent in the predominantly Arab towns of Nazareth and Shfaram. “We have over 200 kids who are studying Arabic and classical music there,” he said. “You see the talent and the enthusiasm, and it just breaks your heart.”A handful of graduates from this program are now pursuing advanced instrumental studies at Tel Aviv University, where Mr. Mehta has founded the Buchmann-Mehta School of Music. “So one of these days we’ll move the curtain at the end of an audition, and there will be an Arab boy or girl there,” he said. “It’s my dream.”