Officials in Wisconsin and Texas sought ways to preserve their contested new voter identification requirements on Friday as civil rights groups celebrated two victories against laws they said would suppress minority voting.Thursday’s rulings, blocking new voter requirements, are part of a wider pattern of continuing litigation over changes in voting procedures adopted by several states, with the ultimate outcomes still to be determined, probably by the Supreme Court well after the November elections.The contested laws have mainly been promoted by Republicans in the name of preventing fraud, and opposed by Democrats and civil rights groups who note that voter fraud is extremely rare and say the measures are designed to stifle voting among liberal-leaning black and Hispanic voters.With a one-paragraph order, the Supreme Court on Thursday delayed a Wisconsin law that would require voters, including those filing absentee ballots, to have photo IDs. After protracted litigation and contradictory court rulings, the law took effect only last month, with little advance preparation by election officials.In blocking it temporarily, the Supreme Court apparently agreed with critics who said its sudden imposition would take an unacceptable toll among potential voters on Nov. 4. The court gave no sign of how it would rule on the merits of the law.In response, Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, a Republican, who signed the bill into law and had been expected to benefit from it in his race against the Democratic candidate, Mary Burke, expressed confidence that it would eventually be upheld. The state attorney general, J. B. Van Hollen, said without offering details, “We will be exploring alternatives to address the court’s concern and have voter ID on Election Day."In Texas, a federal judge left no doubt about her reasoning as she struck down a law restricting the kinds of photo IDs that voters must present. In a lengthy opinion, Judge Nelva Gonzales Ramos, a 2011 appointee of President Obama, called the law “draconian” and said it was adopted with the intention of racial discrimination.The strongly worded decision, if upheld, could trigger new federal oversight of Texas election procedures and won praise from Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. in Washington.But the Texas attorney general, Greg Abbott, who is the Republican nominee for governor, said he would ask the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit to overturn the decision. On Friday, he asked Judge Ramos to clarify whether the ruling would apply to next month’s election.The Fifth Circuit court, based in New Orleans, is known as one of the country’s most conservative.While Thursday’s rulings blocked new voter restrictions, two other recent orders by the Supreme Court had the opposite effect: allowing North Carolina to end same-day registration for now, and Ohio to cut back on early voting, including a day of Sunday voting popular among black churches.In these states and others, the constitutional limits on voter rules will be determined in the future. Since 2010, 22 states have adopted new photo ID requirements, cut back on early voting or imposed other restrictions, according to the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University. Voting on the new measures has been highly partisan.Thursday’s court decisions “could help nearly one million voters in two key states,” said Wendy Weiser, director of the Brennan Center’s Democracy Program.While the three recent Supreme Court orders, in Ohio, North Carolina and Wisconsin, have had different short-term effects, they were in another way consistent, said Justin Levitt, an expert on election law at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles.In each case, he said, the court “hit the pause button,” with terse temporary orders that will be in effect until the court decides whether to hear arguments on the laws in the future. In Wisconsin, more than the other states, he said, it appeared that allowing the new rules to take effect would be seriously disruptive.While the Supreme Court did not explain its decision to block the Wisconsin law, even the three dissenting justices expressed concern about “the proximity of the upcoming general election” and said it was “particularly troubling” that absentee ballots had been sent out without notice of the photo ID requirement.Richard L. Hasen, a legal expert on elections at the University of California, Irvine, predicted that the Supreme Court would eventually allow the new restrictions in Ohio, North Carolina and Wisconsin to stand, based on the conservative complexion of the court and the rulings made by conservative lower-court judges. Mr. Levitt said he is not so sure and that opponents of the North Carolina and Wisconsin laws, in particular, may prevail.With less than a month before Wisconsin’s competitive election for governor, the hold on the voter ID law was seen as a setback for Mr. Walker.For the nearly 2,000 clerks who handle Wisconsin’s highly decentralized voting system, the decision was another abrupt change. Since September, when an appeals court let the law take effect, clerks had been racing to educate poll watchers and voters about the new requirement and to alert absentee voters, some of whom had already received ballots.As recently as Thursday, the state agency that oversees elections was planning a last-minute advertising blitz on the new photo ID rule.In Texas, where litigation is in an earlier stage, Judge Ramos wrote that the voter law would “disproportionately impact low-income Texans” and was adopted “with an unconstitutional discriminatory purpose.”That conclusion, if upheld, could trigger one of the federal government’s strongest remaining levers for protecting voter rights.Last year, a divided Supreme Court struck down a key part of the Voting Rights Act, a requirement that all or parts of 16 states with a history of discrimination receive federal pre-clearance before altering voting laws.Left intact was another section under which courts can require similar pre-clearance if states are judged to have engaged in intentional racial discrimination. The Justice Department under President Obama has said it aims to make use of that provision, possibly in North Carolina and Texas, and joined the plaintiffs in the Texas legal challenge.