Good evening. Here’s what you need to know from NYT Now:• Marching in history’s shadow.Protesters in Hong Kong have a fairly narrow set of demands: the resignation of the territory’s top official and more freedom in choosing the next one.But the mere existence of mass protests makes Beijing anxious.“The party equates protests with political instability and a threat to its absolute power,” says our correspondent Andrew Jacobs.“Looking at Chinese history since the 19th century, peaceful protests have often been a prelude to more aggressive popular demands for a change in leadership.”The demands in the 1989 pro-democracy protests in Tiananmen Square were against corruption, censorship and social restrictions, Mr. Jacobs says.“But they were perceived as an existential threat to the party, which is why Chinese leaders crushed them with such brutality.” • No precedent.Liberian authorities say that the man quarantined in Dallas with Ebola  lied on an exit form asking whether he’d been exposed, and now they want to prosecute him.But more complex legal issues are easy to envision under U.S. law, says our reporter John Schwartz.When AIDS was rampant, Mr. Schwartz notes, “many states experimented with laws that made knowingly exposing someone to illness a crime.”Ebola cases could be complicated by the fact that it can take up to 20 days for symptoms to show up. Only then is a person infectious.“Are you going to say if you’re exposed, you’re going to be held liable?” Mr. Schwartz asks.“If you were exposed to someone who was exposed, you’re going to be held liable? If you were in Liberia, then you’re liable?”• Sadism in prime time.An anonymous woman is pursued by a masked, hooded figure who throws a flammable liquid on her and then her car and sets the vehicle ablaze.That scene was from the opening of the new CBS drama “Stalker,” which premiered this week, but it could have been on any number of crime procedurals built on story lines of victimizing women, says our TV critic Neil Genzlinger.“The overindulgence in violence against women that you see in a lot of TV series these days has some ugly attributes — it’s voyeuristic; it’s sadistic — but above all it’s a sign of laziness,” he says.“Not to be flip, but this kind of television is the dark side of the cat video: a guaranteed viewer reaction that requires no thought or creativity or exertion.“The only difference is, cat videos are harmless. I don’t think gruesome, exploitative television is.”MARKETS• Wall Street stocks barely moved. The S.&P. 500 was flat.TONIGHT• Change of pace.“Gracepoint,” a new crime drama, stars David Tennant (a.k.a. the former “Doctor Who”) and Anna Gunn of “Breaking Bad” as detectives solving the murder of a young boy over a 10-episode arc. (9 p.m. Eastern on Fox)“Expect an assortment of characters, a lot of suspects, a slow unfolding of the investigation and the back stories,” Mr. Genzlinger, the TV critic, writes. “It’s a crime novel more than ‘Law & Order.'”• Trials of love.Kate Walsh stars as a party girl and tough criminal court judge in the new comedy series “Bad Judge.” (9 p.m. Eastern, NBC)And Cristin Milioti plays a lawyer who signs up on an Internet dating site, where a glitch sends her a mismatch, on the new “A to Z.” (9:30 p.m. Eastern, NBC).• Game night.Two division playoff series start today in Major League Baseball. In the first game, the Baltimore Orioles defeated the visiting Detroit Tigers, 12-3. The Kansas City Royals defeated the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, 3-2.In N.F.L. action, the Minnesota Vikings were dominated by the Green Bay Packers, 10-42.• If you’re staying up … On “The Daily Show”: The documentarian Ben Steele, whose latest film is “Hunted: The War Against Gays in Russia.” (11 p.m. Eastern, Comedy Central)“The Tonight Show”: Derek Jeter, the newly retired Yankees player; the actor James Marsden from the coming romantic film “The Best of Me”; and music from the pop rock band 5 Seconds of Summer. (11:35 p.m. Eastern, NBC)“Late Show With David Letterman”: Johnny Galecki, star of “Big Bang Theory”; André Benjamin, otherwise known as André 3000, who stars as Jimi Hendrix in the biopic “Jimi: All Is by My Side”; and the indie rock band Delta Spirit performs. (11:35 p.m. Eastern, CBS)TOMORROW• Job numbers.The last U.S. jobs report before the midterm elections is released by the Labor Department in the morning.The unemployment rate is projected to hold at 6.1 percent, equaling the lowest level since 2008.Adeel Hassan contributed reporting.Your Evening Briefing is posted at 5 p.m. weekdays.Don’t miss Your Morning Briefing at 6 a.m. weekdays.What would you like to see here? Email us at nytnow@nytimes.com.Follow us on Twitter: @nytnow.