ALBANY —  It was a quiet and sudden end to what had started as a high-profile battle against Statehouse corruption.With little fanfare and no advance notice, and at the tail end of a 44-minute teleconference with reporters explaining the state’s new budget deal, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Saturday that he intended to dismantle the Commission to Investigate Public Corruption. The commission was formed last July, stocked with “the best minds in law enforcement” and given a broad mandate to restore public trust in government.Mr. Cuomo said the reforms he wanted would be accomplished by new laws that he had persuaded legislative leaders to support as part of the budget accord, including tougher laws on bribery and corruption, and improved enforcement of election law. That, he said, would eliminate the need for the panel, known as the Moreland Commission.“That’s what this package is,” the governor said.But government watchdogs, and some lawmakers, disagree.Some speculated that the governor and the Legislature had struck a deal to move beyond the issue of corruption, an unwelcome distraction in an election year.“The fact that ethics reform was on the table as a bargaining chip suggests to me that we have much more work to do,” Senator Brad Hoylman, a Manhattan Democrat, said on Monday, calling himself “disheartened” by the outcome. “It’s a terrible irony that the Moreland Commission is being defunded as part of a larger discussion and negotiation.”But it seemed clear on Monday, as the Legislature moved to enact the budget, that the more significant political reforms that had been on the table were now off.The new ethics laws, incorporated into the budget legislation, left intact a loophole allowing for unlimited donations to so-called housekeeping accounts for political parties. They did not lower limits for individual political donations, which are generous compared with those in other states.And they so drastically scaled back Mr. Cuomo’s proposal for a system of public financing for state political campaigns — reducing it to a pilot program covering only this year’s race for state comptroller — that advocates of campaign-finance reform suggested it was so flawed that candidates should boycott it.Government watchdogs expressed deep disappointment with the decision to close down the commission, which was packed with legal firepower, including more than a dozen former or current district attorneys from around the state, armed with subpoena power. It had also mounted several ambitious investigations.“It was absolutely the wrong thing to do,” said Susan Lerner, the executive director of Common Cause New York.Lawrence Norden, the deputy director of the Democracy Program at the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University, said the commission’s most insightful observation — that many seemingly unethical acts in Albany, involving money and policy making, were technically legal — had been largely ignored by lawmakers.“What the Legislature and governor came up with did not address that at all,” he said.Advocates’ hopes for the commission had been lifted last fall, after supportive remarks by the federal prosecutors in Manhattan and Brooklyn, among others. But there was resistance from the Legislature, which refused requests for information about lawmakers’ outside income, leading to a legal battle. And there were accusations of interference by the governor’s office, which asked the panel to limit the scope of some of its investigations.Still, a December report by the commission was praised, and Mr. Cuomo said he was looking forward to working “with the Legislature to enact systemic reform.”Matthew Wing, a spokesman for Mr. Cuomo, said on Monday that the governor had always promised to disband the commission if the Legislature addressed election law enforcement, government transparency and criminal behavior. “And that’s exactly what happened,” Mr. Wing said.Michelle Duffy, a spokeswoman for the commission, said that it would have no comment until after the passage of the budget, which was expected late Monday night. In a statement Saturday, the commission said it was pleased that many of its recommendations would be enacted, including the creation of an independent enforcement counsel at the State Board of Elections, which has often been accused of lax oversight of election law.Makau Mutua, dean of the SUNY Buffalo Law School and a commission member, applauded the new laws and changes at the Board of Elections.“Those are just fantastic,” he said.But he acknowledged disappointment that public financing would be implemented only for this year’s comptroller’s race.“Certainly that remains to be pursued in the future,” he said.