Good evening. Here’s what you need to know from NYT Now:• Inside the agency.The director of the Secret Service was under fire today from members of Congress over the agency’s shortcomings, including not stopping an intruder from making it deep inside the White House.Many of the questioners were concerned that the agency’s culture contributed to the lapses, says Michael S. Schmidt, who covered the hearing for The Times.Some in Congress were troubled that whistle-blowers inside the service seemed “more comfortable” going to them to report problems than telling their superiors, he says.“Members of Congress said that means the executives in the agency aren’t getting the total amount of information about what’s going on,” Mr. Schmidt says.Lawmakers are pushing for an investigation of the intruder episode, he says, because of the magnitude of the blunder and worries about what deeper problems it might reveal.“Of all the things that have gone wrong in the past few years,” Mr. Schmidt says, “this is clearly the biggest.”• How China has changed. And not.The tens of thousands of pro-democracy demonstrators crowding the streets in Hong Kong have drawn comparisons to the 1989 protesters in Tiananmen Square in Beijing.The Tiananmen protests ended only when China’s secretive, hard-line leadership unleashed its forces, killing hundreds.We asked Keith Bradsher, our Hong Kong bureau chief, in what ways China was different from 25 years ago.For one thing, he says, it is “far more economically powerful and technologically sophisticated.”But it used some of its wealth and skill to create “some of the world’s most advanced surveillance equipment and best-equipped internal security forces,” he says.“It has invested heavily to maintain censorship despite rapid communications changes, like the rise of the Internet and the advent of smartphones.”And the leadership’s political grip is still firm, he says.“The Communist Party remains in tight control, making decisions in secrecy and allowing very little direct public input.” • The prayer penalty.“This was clearly a bad call, and to the N.F.L.’s credit — I’m sure they’re hypersensitive — they knew right away that this is not something they wanted to let stand.”That’s our football reporter Ken Belson on the league’s quick denunciation of the 15-yard penalty meted out to Husain Abdullah of the Kansas City Chiefs, who knelt and pressed his forehead to the turf in Muslim prayer after a touchdown on Monday night.The penalty, for inappropriate “celebration,” offended not only Muslims, but also outraged fans primed to pounce on any sign of poor judgment and double standards.“With the whole backdrop of domestic violence and the Redskins,” Mr. Belson says, “the last thing the league wants to do is tick off other groups.”MARKETS• Wall Street stocks slid. The S.&P. 500 fell 0.3 percent.TONIGHT• The perils of dating.Three rom-coms debut on network TV this week, two of them tonight.“Selfie” is about a social media superstar who enlists her co-worker to teach her how to connect with people in the real world. (8 p.m. Eastern, ABC)And the philosophy of “Manhattan Love Story” is that relationships are best when you keep most thoughts to yourself. (8:30 p.m. Eastern, ABC)• The ladies who make us laugh.The “Makers” series, which last season documented the women’s movement, returns tonight with the first of six episodes, this one focusing on women in comedy.The documentary includes commentary from female comedians like Kathy Griffin, Ellen DeGeneres, Sarah Silverman, Carol Burnett and Joan Rivers, who died a few weeks ago at age 81. (PBS, check local listings)• Party like it's 2014.At his studio complex in Minnesota, Prince is celebrating today’s release of his albums “Art Official Age” and “PlectrumElectrum.”Fans are invited to attend, though not in person, at 10:30 p.m. Eastern.• If you’re staying up … On “The Daily Show”: Ben Affleck, star of “Gone Girl,” in theaters on Thursday. (11 p.m. Eastern, Comedy Central)“The Colbert Report”: Jeffrey Tambor, star of the new Amazon series “Transparent.” (11:31 p.m. Eastern, Comedy Central)“Late Show With David Letterman”: John Oliver; Maggie Q, who stars with Dylan McDermott in “Stalker,” premiering Wednesday night on CBS; Bleachers performs. (11:35 p.m. Eastern, CBS)TOMORROW• Occupy Hong Kong.The crowds  blocking the streets of the financial hub will most likely grow Wednesday, which is a public holiday commemorating the 65th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China.Adeel Hassan and Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.Your Evening Briefing is posted at 5 p.m. weekdays.Don’t miss Your Morning Briefing at 6 a.m. weekdays.What would you like to see here? Email us at nytnow@nytimes.com.Follow us on Twitter: @nytnow.