ISLAMABAD, Pakistan —  Pakistani lawmakers met in an emergency session on Tuesday to express support for Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, after days of violent protests had appeared to bring the government to the brink of collapse.Thousands of protesters, many armed with sticks and batons, remained camped outside Parliament, demanding the resignation of Mr. Sharif and accusing him of electoral fraud, nepotism and corruption. But after three days of clashes between protesters and security forces that left three dead and hundreds wounded, there were no reports of violence on Tuesday.Separate but sympathetic protest movements, led by the opposition politician Imran Khan and the cleric Muhammad Tahir-ul Qadri, have paralyzed Islamabad for two weeks now.As the demonstrations have stretched on and grown more aggressive in recent days, there have been intensifying accusations that the country’s powerful military establishment has supported, or even directed, the protests in order to weaken Mr. Sharif. Protest leaders and military officials have denied those accusations.On Tuesday, though, there was a sense that protest leaders were cautiously slowing the pace a day after demonstrators stormed the state television headquarters, and after a meeting between the army chief of staff and Mr. Sharif initially caused alarmed speculation that the military was pushing him to step down.In Parliament, leaders of several parties criticized the protests and expressed support for Mr. Sharif’s continuing in office, calling it critical for Pakistani democracy that he not be removed by force. Mr. Sharif listened to the proceedings with a somber expression, occasionally thumping his desk during more emotional appeals.But support for Mr. Sharif was not unalloyed. Although one senator with the Pakistan Peoples Party, Aitzaz Ahsan, addressed the prime minister with the admonition that “no one can force you to resign,” he followed that with the admission, “We stand with you out of compulsion.”Lawmakers have expressed growing criticism of Mr. Sharif’s governance in recent months, complaining that he has been aloof on important issues and mostly absent from parliamentary proceedings.But the protests by Mr. Qadri and Mr. Khan, and especially the violence of the past few days, appeared to galvanize political leaders to take the side of the standing government. In particular, the accusations of the military’s involvement appeared to outrage many.“We request that the armed forces remain within their constitutional limits and be with us,” said Mahmood Khan Achakzai, a blunt nationalist politician, during his speech on the Parliament floor.Maulana Fazalur Rehman, an influential religious politician, claimed that even as protesters did not hesitate to attack and beat police officers, they appeared to melt away at the signal of army officers on the street. “Are the police and army from separate states?” Mr. Rehman wondered.Mr. Khan and Mr. Qadri appeared together for the first time Tuesday evening since they started their separate protest campaigns. Mr. Khan announced that his party’s lawmakers would resign from Parliament in Wednesday’s sitting after a senior party leader made a final speech.Stick-wielding supporters of Mr. Qadri could be seen staffing checkpoints on a main avenue to the government sector, frisking people as they approached the prime minister’s offices and Parliament. Lawmakers had to use a longer, alternate route to reach Parliament for the joint session, which is expected to last a week.Taj Muhammad, 25, a checkpoint operator who appeared to be wearing a helmet taken from a police officer, said the posts were meant to keep order among the protesters and to offer some protection against possible police attacks. “We have seen the brutalities of Punjab police in Lahore, and now in Islamabad,” he said. “The army is the real protector of this country.”Despite appearing more calm on Tuesday, protesters showed no signs of winding down their demonstrations. Some analysts said that the standoff was likely to stretch for days, even though resistance to the protests appeared to be solidifying.“This crisis is likely to continue to play out over the next few days and perhaps into next week,” said Arif Rafiq, a political analyst. “The political class has united, thwarting any possible direct military intervention. But it remains to be seen how Khan will back out from his demand for the prime minister’s resignation.”“He has been obstinate,” Mr. Rafiq added, referring to Mr. Khan, “driving himself deeper into a ditch.”