Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Ebola victims.The Spanish nurse who was the first person to contract Ebola outside West Africa has now tested negative for the virus.An Ebola symposium is part of the annual World Health Summit in Berlin today, and European Union foreign ministers address the outbreak in Brussels.• Campaign business.President Obama finishes a two-day campaign swing in Illinois today after a week of addressing the Ebola crisis.On Sunday, he visited rallies at a Maryland high school and a Chicago gymnasium for the states’ Democratic candidates for governor.• A morning of calm.After three consecutive nights of confrontations between the police and protesters in Hong Kong, the protests turned quiet after midnight today.Two pro-democracy lawmakers quieted the crowd, while the police said they would reduce the number of officers deployed.• Search for hikers ends.Nepal ended rescue operations today in its northern mountains, saying it believed all hikers stranded by a series of blizzards and avalanches that left dozens dead have been rescued.• Departures at the top in Japan.Two ministers appointed by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s cabinet only a month ago stepped down today. Both women had been accused of election improprieties.• From rags to ruler.Joko Widodo, who was born in a slum, was sworn in today as president of Indonesia, completing an improbable rise to lead the world’s fourth most populous nation.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks are mixed to start the week.European markets ended down about 1 percent after SAP and Philips disappointed investors. Japanese stocks led a rally in Asia.• IBM blamed a “marked slowdown in client buying behavior” in September for its weaker third-quarter profits, announced today.IBM also said it would pay an Abu Dhabi company $1.5 billion to take over its unprofitable chip-manufacturing operations.• Apple releases its quarterly earnings after the market closes, but the period does not include the record-breaking first weekend of sales for its new iPhones.The company also opened Apple Pay, its mobile payment system, for business today.• Marc Andreessen, the tech investor, said today that he is leaving eBay’s board.He had been warring with the activist investor Carl Icahn over whether the company should spin off PayPal, which it recently agreed to do.• Another 200 of McDonald’s Russian restaurants underwent safety inspections, in what many see as retribution for Western sanctions over Russia’s Ukraine involvement.OVER THE WEEKEND• Texas’ voter identification law was upheld by the Supreme Court, leaving in place a rule requiring voters to have government-issued photo ID for the November election.• American military airdrops delivered ammunition, small arms and medical supplies to the Kurdish fighters taking on Islamic State forces in the Syrian town of Kobani.• Peyton Manning set the N.F.L. touchdown passing record — 510, two more than Brett Favre — during the Broncos’ victory over the 49ers on Sunday night.• Hordes of partygoers turned the annual pumpkin festival in Keene, N.H., into chaos, and police officers in riot gear were called to break them up.• Quarantine ended for many of the people in Texas who came into contact with Thomas Eric Duncan, who died of Ebola on Oct. 8.• The funeral for Mr. Duncan took place at a North Carolina church on Saturday. “Let’s not forget how he died,” his half brother told mourners. “He died helping someone.”• “Fury,” the World War II film starring Brad Pitt, made a show of force at the weekend box office, taking in $23.5 million and bumping “Gone Girl” from No. 1.NOTEWORTHY• A billionaire’s blocks.A billion-dollar donation to the Metropolitan Museum of Art opens today in New York. The cosmetics heir Leonard A. Lauder gave the museum nearly 80 Cubist paintings, drawings and sculptures by Picasso, Braque, Leger and Gris.• Four minutes short of a game.Each quarter was 11 minutes long instead of 12 in the preseason game between the Brooklyn Nets and the Boston Celtics on Sunday in an N.B.A. experiment to make the games more TV-friendly. The Celtics won, 95-90.• Movies about money.Prominent directors and economists collaborated to create a series of 20 short films called “We the Economy,” which will be screened today at no charge in select theaters and available for streaming later.• In case you missed it.We have your episode recaps of “Homeland,” “The Good Wife” and “Boardwalk Empire.”BACK STORYThe justices of the Supreme Court, who returned to the bench this month for the new term, have the ultimate job security: They can stay for life.Still, some call it quits. Of the 112 justices in all, 54 retired or resigned.At the moment, there are three former justices still living.John Paul Stevens, the third-longest-serving justice, retired in 2010 after 35 years. The 94-year-old released a book in the spring suggesting some tweaks to the Constitution.Sandra Day O’Connor, the court’s first woman, had said she wanted to stay longer, but retired in 2006 because her husband was ill; he died in 2009.She has remained active since leaving the court, even filling in on federal appellate courts across the country.David Souter, never a creature of Washington, has kept a lower profile since retiring in 2009. He returned to New Hampshire, where he reads and occasionally hears cases.As he told The Washington Post in 2011, “I drove north from Washington with no regrets about the prior 19 years or about the decision to try living a more normal life for whatever time might remain.”Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Email us at briefing@nytimes.com.