WASHINGTON — For all the finger-pointing among Democrats over Tuesday’s election calamity, the White House, Congress and party establishment all share responsibility for weaknesses that the defeats laid bare, critics say, and should confront them as the 2016 contest takes shape.The problems are fundamental, involving questions of where Democrats focus their party-building efforts, what voters they talk to, and most crucial, what they say to those voters. Missing this year, many Democrats say, was a broad economic message to enthuse supporters and convert some independents.While the Democrats’ loss of their Senate majority owed much to the fact that they were defending so many seats in the Republican-friendly South and West, that dynamic only underscored the lost promise of Barack Obama’s famed 2004 declaration that there is no red and blue America, only a United States of America — a belief he reiterated, “for all the cynics who say otherwise,” on Wednesday.However naïve his pronouncement — both then and now — as a candidate in 2008 Mr. Obama built up organizations and hopes among Democrats even in conservative places like Alaska, North Dakota and Idaho. In February 2008, more than 14,000 people jammed a Boise State University hall to hear him speak. “They told me there weren’t any Democrats in Idaho,” Mr. Obama exclaimed. “But I didn’t believe them.”Yet during his presidency, the national party has set aside that build-it-and-they-will-come approach and allowed the 50-state strategy that Howard Dean, the former chairman, oversaw to wane, focusing instead on Democratic strongholds and battlegrounds. And rarely has Mr. Obama visited states that are not Democratic blue or swing-vote purple.“We’ve suffered from the neglect of the campaign committees out here,” said Larry LaRocco, a former Idaho congressman. He and other state Democrats had sought help from the national party for local Democrats, given hopes kindled by Idaho Republicans’ infighting and flawed candidates. Despite Tuesday’s Republican wave, Idaho Democrats did gain a state legislative seat and came close in other contests. “With some resources in here we could have a field day,” Mr. LaRocco insisted.But even he does not argue that conservative Idaho should be a party priority, only that to forfeit states and regions ensures Democrats cannot compete.More broadly, Democrats across the country are increasingly debating how or even whether they should be doing more to win voters largely lost since the 1960s civil rights era — men, and especially working-class white men.Some Democrats are resigned, if not content, to all but give up since white men are a shrinking share of the electorate, while the expanding ranks of single women and Latino, African-American and young voters strongly favor Democrats.But while that gives Democrats the edge in picking presidents, it hurts them in midterm elections because so many of their supporters skip voting in nonpresidential years, leaving a whiter, older and less female electorate that favors Republicans.The midterm drop-off of Democrats’ core supporters “has reached historic levels,” Ruy Teixeira and John Halpin, analysts at the left-leaning Center for American Progress, wrote after the election.When combined with white men’s overwhelming support for Republicans, the outcome, as on Tuesday, is Democrats’ defeat. In North Carolina, Colorado and Iowa — states where Democrats lost Senate seats after campaigns that emphasized abortion rights, birth control coverage and pay equity for women — support from female voters was disappointing, and swamped by men’s margins for the Republicans.In North Carolina, where more than a third of voters were white men, Senator Kay Hagan lost their votes by 42 points, 27 percent to 69 percent, exit polls showed. Senator Mary L. Landrieu got support from just 15 percent of white men who voted in Louisiana’s multicandidate contest, a result that helps explain why she is considered likely to lose a Dec. 6 runoff election against the Republican Bill Cassidy.But in Michigan, the Democrats’ Senate candidate, Representative Gary Peters, prevailed after a long campaign in which he aggressively appealed to white men, especially blue-collar voters and small-business managers. He won 50 percent of all male voters, and 44 percent of white men to 52 percent for the vanquished Republican Terri Lynn Land, an eight-point gap that nonetheless was much reduced from Mr. Peters’ 21-point disadvantage among white men last February in a statewide poll by the nonpartisan firm EPIC-MRA.Even before Tuesday’s results were in, some Democrats were complaining that the party had failed to develop a national economic message and policy agenda that would appeal both to white men and to women and minorities, as well as counter the Republicans’ own lack of an affirmative policy platform. Many blamed Mr. Obama, yet the president was all but banned from the campaign trail given his unpopularity.“Absent any clear or far-reaching national agenda and message to address people’s real economic concerns about jobs, wages and opportunity,” Mr. Teixeira and Mr. Halpin wrote late Thursday, “the Democrats essentially ceded control of the national campaign, opting to try their luck with a series of localized and targeted campaigns.”Another analysis released Friday, from Democracy Corps and the Voter Participation Center, which works to increase turnout among unmarried women — a quarter of the voting-age population — concluded that single women’s support fell short because they “did not hear issues important to them: an economic agenda for working women and men.”Democratic-leaning voters heard “random policies that you have to figure out that they add up to a big economic narrative,” the pollster Stan Greenberg of Democracy Corps said in an interview, citing the minimum wage and pay equity proposals as examples. “There were bits and pieces, but it was up to the voter to decide that it all added up to a big economic narrative.”“To me, the biggest mistake was not talking about health care,” he said. By failing to talk about the law and its successes — newly insuring millions of people, giving all insured Americans preventive-care benefits and consumer protections, and contributing to lower health care spending overall — Democrats allowed Republicans to define the president’s signature domestic accomplishment as a failure, virtually unchallenged.Democrats were in a defensive crouch, much like they were at times in the Reagan era, when Newt Gingrich led Republicans to take control of the House of Representatives in the mid-1990s and in the early years of George W. Bush’s presidency. Conservatives, by contrast, like Govs. Scott Walker in Wisconsin and Sam Brownback in Kansas, campaigned with conviction even at risk of defeat.“It seems like we’re always walking on eggshells,” Mr. LaRocco said, raising the question “What do we stand for?”The answer to that now becomes the defining challenge for anyone who seeks the Democrats’ 2016 nomination to succeed Mr. Obama.