Ostensibly, the goal was to teach students a lesson about democracy, a lesson that can sometimes seem lost on the New York State Legislature.In early May, in what the sponsoring senator called “democracy in action,” the State Senate devoted more than 40 minutes debating whether yogurt should be the official state snack, as suggested by a fourth-grade class from western New York. For their efforts, the senators were mocked by David Letterman and Jon Stewart.Now, in the waning weeks of the legislative session, Senator John A. DeFrancisco  hopes to place on the agenda a bill that would name the wood frog the official state amphibian.The little guy (Lithobates sylvaticus) is already New York’s unofficial amphibian, but at the request of 9-year-old Lili Winkelman and her fellow students in Irene Manna’s fourth-grade class at the State Street Intermediate School in Skaneateles, near Syracuse, Mr. DeFrancisco introduced legislation to welcome the wood frog, like the beaver, bluebird, snapping turtle, brook trout, striped bass and ladybug, into the family of official state fauna.“I’ve been in the Senate for 22 years and this is the second time I’ve done this,” said Mr. DeFrancisco, a Republican whose district surrounds Syracuse. (Responding to a request from another young constituent wondering why there was only a Mother’s Day and a Father’s Day, he once sponsored legislation to create a Children’s Day).Luckily, no other state claims the wood frog as its official amphibian (the tree frog, bullfrog, leopard frog, spadefoot toad and Texas toad were already taken).What’s more, New York legislators, accustomed to frigid Albany winters and to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s preference for giving speeches in frosty venues, share with the wood frog a trait pointed out by Assemblyman Gary D. Finch, an upstate Republican who is co-sponsoring Mr. DeFrancisco’s bill: “They can tolerate cold and reanimate themselves in the spring.”While legislators can sometimes seem coldhearted, the frogs, though certainly coldblooded, appear anything but. They determine their mates by hugging; and siblings seek one another out as adults.Mrs. Manna’s class began studying state symbols in September. They contacted the Legislature after Lili discovered that there was no official state amphibian and that wood frogs, in particular, held promise for scientific research.“I really like frogs,” she said. “Because wood frogs can freeze in the winter and come back to life in the spring, they can help organ donors.”Still, Mrs. Manna said, her students were realistic about the pace of democracy.“We researched how long it took other things to become a law, five, six, seven years,” she said. “The only thing that would be nice is if it passes before I die, and I’m 63.”Mr. DeFrancisco acknowledged that the Senate’s prolonged yogurt debate was ripe for parody, but said he hoped the wood frog would not meet the same fate.“We have a state muffin, we have a lot of state things,” he said. “This is not something I would have initiated on my own, but knowing how important it was for the students, I readily took it on. We’re concerned that people don’t vote, don’t get involved in government.“This is an incredible learning experience,” he said.