Jackie Robinson had a stellar 1945 season with the Kansas City Monarchs of the Negro leagues but was virtually unknown to most of America. That fall, he picked up a pen to write a letter to the sportswriter Wendell Smith, whose name he spelled with one L.“I want to thank you and the paper for all you have done and are doing in my behalf,” Robinson wrote in near-perfect Palmer Method cursive script, referring to The Pittsburgh Courier, a prominent black newspaper. “As you know, I am not worried about what the white press or people think as long as I continue to get the best wishes of my people.”The letter was written eight days after Branch Rickey, the president of the Brooklyn Dodgers, announced that he had signed Robinson for the team’s farm club in Montreal, and a year and a half before Robinson broke Major League Baseball’s color line. Decades later, the film “42” illuminated Smith’s vital role in Robinson’s story.“Wendell Smith was the man,” Vernon Jordan, a former executive director of the United Negro College Fund and former president of the National Urban League, said in a telephone interview. “He was the pioneer guy. And he gave Jackie Robinson the advice he needed.”He also gave advice to Rickey. Sometimes subtly, sometimes urgently, always respectfully, Smith pressed Rickey on the issue of blacks in the major leagues, and the exchanges between them, now tucked away in the Baseball Hall of Fame library in Cooperstown, N.Y., make up some of the most riveting and significant correspondence in the history of the civil rights movement,Smith asked Rickey where Robinson would stay during spring training in Daytona Beach, Fla., where beaches were segregated as late as the 1960s. Rickey, the letters show, eventually invited Smith to camp a few days early to “see to it that satisfactory living conditions” were provided. Smith also alerted Rickey to the possibility that Robinson would not be allowed to travel easily with the Montreal club; he suggested private automobile accommodations.Smith also steeled Robinson’s courage as his major league debut approached.“All you have to do is to keep a cool head, play the kind of ball you are capable of playing and don’t worry about anything,” Smith wrote to Robinson. “As you know, Rickey is no dummy. He is a very methodical man and will see to it that you are treated right. All you have to do is take care of Jackie Robinson on the playing field, and he will do the rest.”Although Smith made his living as a reporter, his most significant writing was in private correspondence to Rickey.“Now, Mr. Rickey, I want you to feel as though the publishers of The Pittsburgh Courier and I are a distinct part of this undertaking,” Smith wrote. “We do not want you to take all of the responsibility with regards to help to strengthen these boys spiritually and morally for the part they are to play in this great adventure.”Smith was raised in a white corner of Detroit, where he witnessed racial prejudice from a pitcher’s mound. He hurled a masterpiece in his American Legion team’s 1-0 playoff win, but the Tigers scout who was present signed Smith’s catcher and the losing pitcher, who were white, to contracts. At that moment, a sports career was born, in the newsroom and in the press box.Although his catcher, Mike Tresh, played 12 years for the Chicago White Sox and the Cleveland Indians, Smith changed Major League Baseball forever.He thrust Robinson into Rickey’s sights and helped broaden Rickey’s vision. Smith helped propel Robinson into the Hall of Fame but did not join him there until 1993, when he posthumously received the J. G. Taylor Spink Award for baseball writing.“Acknowledged as the most skilled writer of his time, ‘Smitty’ has been overlooked simply because he was black,” wrote Brian Carroll, the author of a book on the black news media and the integration of professional baseball.As early as 1937, Smith found in his own rudimentary polls that three-fourths of National League players and managers favored baseball integration. He sensed an opening and pushed a Boston politician to withhold support in the annual City Council vote to permit Sunday baseball unless the Red Sox and the Braves offered a tryout to black players.Disappointed that neither team agreed to sign the Negro leagues stars Satchel Paige and Josh Gibson after one-hour tryouts, Smith met with Rickey, who was at the time contemplating a third Negro league. Soon the two were referring to Robinson conspiratorially as “that young man from the West.”Embedded in this story is the remarkable history of The Pittsburgh Courier, an important voice when American news was as segregated as American ball fields. It had a circulation of 347,000 nationally in 1947, when Robinson broke in with the Dodgers. Only 15 newspapers in the United States today have bigger circulations, all but three concentrated in a local area.The Pittsburgh Courier’s prominence — and its ambition — led it to agree to pay Smith’s expenses as he traveled with Robinson.In a 1946 letter to Rickey, Smith wrote, “We are trying to render the cause of Democracy in this country, so ably championed by you.”Later, in a reminiscence for the Hall of Fame, Smith wrote: “The Courier always had some kind of a program going, a crusade for something of consequence. I suggested a campaign for the admittance, an inclusion, of Negro ballplayers in the big leagues. The paper picked up on it.”Rod Doss, the editor and publisher of The New Pittsburgh Courier, as the paper is now known, is proud of its legacy.“The Courier allowed reporters to bring home a very important story and to celebrate the athletes in the Negro leagues and black colleges down South,” he said. “It is part of the story of how blacks gained entry into sports.”