BEIJING — Nearly two dozen people have been detained across mainland China for expressing support for the growing protests in Hong Kong, in an effort by the Chinese authorities to contain the spread of pro-democracy sentiment, human rights groups reported on Wednesday.In recent days, the police have moved swiftly against scores of people after they shared articles and photographs about the demonstrations online. Those not detained say they have been harassed and threatened with arrest if they continue to publicize news about the protests.Several detainees had reportedly taken part in “Going Bald for Hong Kong,” an ad hoc solidarity campaign in which participants cut off their hair and then posted images of their newly bald heads online.Ou Biaofeng, a social activist in the central province of Hunan who was among the first to publicize his shaved head on social media, said he was picked up by the authorities early Wednesday morning and driven to the countryside. “I’m on a forced vacation,” he said by telephone in a whisper, presumably because he was in the company of the police.Mr. Ou, who flashed a victory sign in his photos online, said before he hung up that he had no idea how long he would be in custody.Mr. Ou may be among the lucky ones. Wang Long, a rights advocate in Shenzhen, the booming Chinese city that borders Hong Kong, was detained Monday on charges of “creating a disturbance” after he forwarded news reports about the protests, according to Chinese Human Rights Defenders, an advocacy group.As many as 20 people in the nearby city of Guangzhou were also rounded up on Tuesday after they gathered in a park to show support for the protests unfolding 80 miles away, Chinese Human Rights Defenders said. In addition to those detained, Amnesty International said Wednesday that at least 60 people in China had been called in for questioning for supporting the protests.The ruling Communist Party has taken a zero-tolerance approach to calls for political liberalization since popular unrest began sweeping the Arab world four years ago. But analysts say that Chinese leaders are especially concerned about the potential spread of pro-democracy sentiment from Hong Kong, a former British colony that enjoys prodigious liberties, including a freewheeling news media and an uncensored Internet, and is a popular tourist draw for mainlanders.“The Hong Kong protests present a huge challenge to China because everyone here speaks Chinese and there are so many close ties between Hong Kong and China,” said Maya Wang, a researcher at Human Rights Watch in Hong Kong. “No matter how hard the government might try to stop news from getting in, the border remains porous.”For the moment, the government retains the upper hand. The images of young, well-behaved protesters that have been beamed around the world in recent days have been largely scrubbed from the Internet in China, as have the demonstrators’ demands for fully democratic elections. Instead, the country’s state-run news outlets have been issuing shrill editorials describing the gatherings as illegal, chaotic and backed by foreign governments.But for China’s beleaguered rights advocates, many of whom use software to circumvent the country’s Internet restrictions, the protests have been inspiring. “There’s a lot of excitement, some quiet and some openly expressed,” said Renee Xia, international director of Chinese Human Rights Defenders.Shen Liangqing, 51, a veteran of the ill-fated pro-democracy demonstrations that jolted China a quarter-century ago, said he had been glued to his computer screen in recent days. On Sunday, he, too, took a hair clipper to his head and posted the results on Twitter.“When it comes to democracy, Hong Kong will rise and fall along with the mainland,” he said by telephone. “As compatriots, we need to support Hong Kong; they supported us during the 1989 student movement.”Mr. Shen, a writer from Anhui Province who spent four years in jail for his political activism, had yet to receive a visit from the police but said he was prepared for a knock at the door.“We live right under an authoritarian regime, so political actions like ours come with significant risks,” he said. “Freedom is earned. You need to pay the price.”