DENVER —  The Democratic governor of Montana appointed the lieutenant governor on Friday to fill the Senate seat left open by the departure of Senator Max Baucus, a move Democrats hope will improve their chances of retaining the seat in what is expected to be a fiercely fought election this November.Although the lieutenant governor, John Walsh, had already announced his candidacy for the Senate, Democrats and some political analysts say his new post as a sitting senator — albeit a temporary, appointed one — could help raise his profile with voters and give him some of the benefits of incumbency.Friday’s announcement by Gov. Steve Bullock came a day after the Senate voted 96 to 0 to confirm Mr. Baucus, the six-term senator, as ambassador to China. Mr. Baucus had announced his retirement in April, raising Republican hopes of picking up a seat in a right-leaning state where President Obama is unpopular and where there was no Democratic heir apparent.The race in Montana could be pivotal in determining whether Republicans can gain the six seats they would need to take control of the Senate. It is one of six contested races where Democrats are defending Senate seats in states carried by Mitt Romney in 2012, and Republicans are hoping to capitalize on antipathy toward the health care overhaul and the state of the economy.In Montana, Republican leaders and donors are coalescing around the first-term Representative Steve Daines for the Senate seat. Mr. Daines, who faces two primary challengers, is running an upbeat campaign advertisement portraying himself as a hunter, father and fifth-generation Montanan.Mr. Daines’s campaign had about $1.1 million in cash at the end of September, according to federal campaign disclosures. Mr. Walsh’s campaign had about $435,000 at the end of the year.“Walsh has a lot of stuff to overcome, and he’s a political novice,” said Robert Saldin, director of the Project on American Democracy and Citizenship at the University of Montana. “This is going to be one of the most-watched Senate elections in the country. There’s not going to be a lot of time to learn the ropes and make some mistakes.”At a news conference in Helena on Friday, Governor Bullock called Mr. Walsh the “most effective” candidate for the Senate seat, adding that he had not interviewed Mr. Walsh for the position and had only informed him on Thursday night. Mr. Walsh emphasized his own biography, talking about the 33 years he served with the Montana National Guard, which included a combat tour of Iraq as well as time as the adjutant general.“My entire adult life has been focused on public service,” said Mr. Walsh, 53.Although Mr. Walsh still faces two Democratic primary challengers, he has the support of leading state and national Democrats, and his appointment is expected to further smooth his path toward winning the nomination.Just minutes after the announcement, Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado, chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, released a statement praising the appointment, saying, “John is the kind of guy who may not agree with the party on every single issue, but he has the selflessness and courage to always do what he thinks is right for Montana.”But political analysts said many Montana voters still know little about Mr. Walsh’s views or life story. Elected lieutenant governor in 2012, he emerged as a Senate candidate this fall as Democrats scrambled to find a replacement for Mr. Baucus, a fixture of Montana’s political world who, as chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, helped shape Mr. Obama’s health care law.Mr. Walsh said he would focus on reducing spending and the national debt, creating jobs and veterans’ issues. He is expected to be sworn in on Tuesday.