OUAGADOUGOU, Burkina Faso — After days of intense political wrangling, a committee of political, military, religious and traditional authorities in Burkina Faso named a former foreign minister and veteran diplomat on Monday to oversee a transition to new elections following the ouster of President Blaise Compaoré.Mr. Compaoré was overthrown on Oct. 31 after days of mass protests against his plans to modify the Constitution and remain in power. Mr. Compaoré subsequently fled to neighboring Ivory Coast. Initially, the military took power, with Lt. Col. Isaac Zida proclaiming himself as the leader of this impoverished West African country — a move that drew broad censure from African and Western nations.Under pressure to cede to civilian rule, the military joined an electoral college of 23 mainly civilian representatives, which named Michel Kafando, a former foreign minister and onetime ambassador to the United Nations, as interim president. His prime task is to oversee a transition to elections by November next year.“This is more than an honor,” Mr. Kafando, 72, told reporters here after discussions within the electoral panel that lasted until the early hours of Monday. Mr. Kafando held several senior posts under Mr. Compaoré.The closed-door debate began on Sunday, hours before a deadline set by the African Union, the continent’s main representative body, to hand power to civilians or face sanctions that could have compounded Burkina Faso’s economic woes.Reuters said Mr. Kafando had been the military’s candidate among five people initially proposed for the job, but his appointment nonetheless seemed to show that the country’s initial lurch to military rule had been countered by advocates of democracy.Other candidates included a journalist, a former journalist and another former government official, according to news reports. Archbishop Paul Ouédraogo of the Roman Catholic Church ruled himself out before the talks began.Burkina Faso, a landlocked former French colony once called Upper Volta, has played a central role in Western efforts to counter Islamic militants in West Africa. But it has not had economic gains to match the strategic role played by Mr. Compaoré during his 27 years in power.Under the terms of a charter for the transition worked out during the negotiations since Mr. Compaoré's departure, Mr. Kafando will not be permitted to run in the presidential election next year.The charter provides for him to appoint a prime minister to select a 25-member interim government. A 90-member National Transitional Council is to act as a legislature until elections are held.