MOSCOW —  At least once an hour, sometimes more frequently, images of battalions of riot police officers in helmets clashing with demonstrators fill the screen of Rossiya 24, one of Russia’s major government-controlled television channels, and newscasters speaking in grave tones inveigh against the injustice and violence by the authorities.The images are not from Kiev, Ukraine, or from here in Moscow, where such scenes have been more than familiar in recent years. They are from Ferguson, Mo., where the shooting death of Michael Brown and the crackdown by the authorities against protesters have provided the latest opportunity for Russia to portray its detractors in America as hypocrites.“Cases of racism are still not rare in the nation of exemplary democracy,” an anchor on Rossiya 24 said on Tuesday, as Ferguson again grabbed a prominent place in the evening news cycle.In Russia’s more tabloid-style news outlets, close coverage of the events in Missouri, including such details as the rap star Nelly’s appearing in support of the demonstrators, has overshadowed the other big story in recent days: that of a high school music teacher under pressure to resign after she inadvertently posted a naked selfie on VKontakte, the Russian social media site.The Russian government itself weighed in on Tuesday. In a long statement, Konstantin Dolgov, the Foreign Ministry’s special representative for human rights, baldly accused the United States of hypocrisy, and said Washington would do better to focus on its own problems rather than intervening in other countries “under the false pretext of defending democracy and human rights.”“While urging other countries to guarantee the freedom of speech and not to suppress antigovernment protests, the United States authorities at home are not too soft with those actively expressing discontent over persistent inequalities, actual discrimination and the situation of ‘second class’ citizens,” Mr. Dolgov said.He added, “American human rights activists are sounding the alarm.”Over the years, Washington has persistently condemned the Kremlin’s suppression of political dissent. The United States was sharply critical, for example, when scuffles between the police and huge crowds denouncing President Vladimir V. Putin in 2012 led to dozens of arrests. Criminal trials in some of those cases are still in the news here.That has given Russia ample motive to gloat whenever accusations arise of heavy-handedness by American law enforcement in the face of public protests.More recently, of course, the United States — to the Kremlin’s great dismay — sided strongly in favor of street protesters in Kiev, who this year succeeded in ousting Ukraine’s president, Viktor F. Yanukovych. An assistant secretary of state, Victoria Nuland, had visited with the demonstrators in Independence Square and handed out cookies. Several United States officials, including Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, also visited Kiev to show solidarity and even addressed the crowd from the stage.The focus on the Ferguson situation is hardly a surprise.Russia paid similarly close attention, for instance, when demonstrators from the Occupy Wall Street movement were arrested in New York in 2011, and government-controlled news media outlets have often rebroadcast video of those arrests to make the same point as their coverage of Ferguson: The freedom of assembly enshrined in the Bill of Rights is not as absolute as promoters of American democracy might suggest.It is not only harsh treatment of protesters that draws Russia’s disapproving eye. Gun crimes, such as school shootings, which are relatively rare in Russia, also get heavy publicity when they occur in the United States.The police response in Missouri — and Russia’s official smirking — has caused deep consternation among critics of the Kremlin here. They see it as being exploited to excuse Russia’s much more pervasive and deep-rooted restrictions on civil liberties, as well as its often arbitrary — and Kremlin-dominated — law enforcement and judicial systems.Maria Baronova, who was arrested at one of the white-ribbon protests against Mr. Putin, posted a photo on Twitter on Tuesday of heavily armed St. Louis County police officers in helmets. Ms. Baronova had faced near-certain conviction on charges of inciting a riot, and she avoided a lengthy prison term only because she qualified for an amnesty program ahead of the Sochi Winter Olympics.“Dear American gvrnmnt,” she wrote alongside the photograph on Twitter. “You can’t imagine how those who fight for freedom in Russia hate you these days. Putin saw this.”One headline over an opinion feature in the newspaper MK this week asked, “Could Ferguson become a second Donetsk?” The reference was to the rebel-controlled city in eastern Ukraine, which was been ravaged by separatist violence. In the article, an expert contributor helpfully reassured that civil war was not imminent in the United States.Coverage of the protests in Ferguson on LifeNews, a site close to the Russian authorities, included a picture of the police arresting Hedy Epstein, who the site noted is a 90-year-old Holocaust survivor. It also reported the arrest of Scott Olson, a photographer for Getty Images, “who tried to take pictures of the policemen.” The site added, “He was soon released.”