TOKYO — President Obama arrived here on Wednesday evening to begin a four-country tour of Asia, after first stopping in Washington State to survey the devastation left there by last month’s deadly mudslide. It was a fitting start, given that everywhere on this trip, he will witness the lingering fallout of disasters, natural and human-made.From South Korea, where public outrage is surging in the wake of a ferry accident that has claimed the lives of scores of teenagers, to Malaysia, where the authorities face harsh scrutiny over their handling of a missing jetliner, Mr. Obama will encounter leaders under pressure from angry, often grief-stricken constituents.In the Philippines, the government has labored to recover from withering criticism of its response to Typhoon Haiyan last fall. Even here in Japan, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was tripped up by after effects of the 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster and faulted last summer for playing down the leaking of highly radioactive water from the plant.White House officials, who have come with a busy agenda of economic and security issues, worry that the leaders — particularly President Park Geun-hye of South Korea, for whom the ferry tragedy is still unfolding — will be preoccupied when they meet with Mr. Obama.“The South Korea visit could really be overshadowed by the ferry,” said a senior administration official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the matter.That would be a missed opportunity for the South Koreans, who appealed to the White House last fall to add a stop in Seoul when news surfaced that Mr. Obama was planning to visit Tokyo. It will be the president’s fourth trip to South Korea, the most he has made in office to any Asian country.South Korean diplomats are characterizing it as a visit by an old friend — a pointed contrast to Mr. Obama’s more formal two-day stop in Japan, which includes an elaborate welcoming ceremony at the Imperial Palace, an audience with Emperor Akihito and a state dinner.Relations between South Korea and Japan have been deeply strained since Ms. Park and Mr. Abe came into office, with the two countries replaying World War II-era grievances. This month, Mr. Obama brokered a carefully orchestrated meeting of the leaders in The Hague that was meant to clear the air.On Wednesday night, Mr. Abe took Mr. Obama to dinner at Sukiyabashi Jiro, a rarefied sushi bar in downtown Tokyo with a celebrity chef. The restaurant seats 10 customers and is booked out months in advance.The prime minister has raised hopes in Washington because of his commitment to overhauling the Japanese economy. The United States would like to announce progress, if not a signed deal, in trade negotiations with Japan during the visit, to help bolster an American-led regional trade pact known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership.While Mr. Abe is perhaps the least distracted of the leaders Mr. Obama will meet — if only because the Fukushima disaster is further in the past — he faces a political fight in persuading Japan’s powerful farmers to open markets in beef and pork, which is critical to reaching a deal.On Thursday, in a news conference with Mr. Obama, Mr. Abe indicated that the United States and Japan had not closed necessary gaps on a deal, falling short of a major goal for the president’s visit.Japan received a symbolic gesture from Mr. Obama when he reaffirmed that disputed Senkaku Islands in the East China Sea that are at the center of a tense standoff between Japan and China are covered under the mutual defense treaty between the United States and Japan.“We don’t take a position on final sovereignty” over the islands, Mr. Obama said in the news conference. “But historically, they have been administered by Japan, and we do not believe they should be subject to change unilaterally.”In Seoul, administration officials said, Mr. Obama hopes to increase pressure on North Korea, which has reverted to a pattern of missile tests and other provocative actions. Yet Ms. Park’s attention is likely to be consumed by the ferry accident.On Monday, Chosun Ilbo, the largest South Korean newspaper, said in an editorial, “People are descending into a collective sense of powerlessness, unable to trust the government with protecting them in emergency situations.” Ms. Park has characterized the ferry captain’s decision to abandon ship with passengers still trapped below decks as akin to murder.Mr. Obama faces an even more delicate situation in Malaysia, which his advisers had hoped to celebrate as a reliable partner in counterterrorism operations and a model of a majority-Muslim democracy in Asia. Instead, it has become a byword for confusion and opacity in the wake of the disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight 370.Malaysia’s response, some critics say, reveals deeper problems with its government, which has long been under one-party rule, dominated by a Malay elite, and has compiled a record of human rights abuses that belies the White House’s upbeat narrative.With the United States already taking part in the painstaking search for the plane in the southern Indian Ocean, there is little more that Mr. Obama can do, except offer solace. He will also try to focus on other issues in what will be the first visit to Malaysia by an American president since Lyndon B. Johnson in 1966.In the Philippines, at least, Mr. Obama will be able to speak openly about the typhoon and offer help for the future. He and President Benigno S. Aquino III are expected to sign a deal to expand access to bases for American warships and planes rotating through the archipelago.