SCHWYZ, Switzerland —  Two weeks ago, voters here vented their frustration at the changes happening around them and voted overwhelmingly to put a stop to mass immigration.At 63.1 percent, the “yes” vote from Schwyz — one of the three founding cantons of the original 13th-century Swiss Confederation — was one of the highest in Switzerland, in striking contrast to the next-door urban canton of Zurich, where only 47.3 percent of voters supported the initiative, whose victory nationwide shook up Europe.Evidently, the good citizens of Schwyz — all 150,000 of them — are particularly upset about the steady influx of foreigners who’ve been flocking to their region of lakes and mountains.For the most part, these are not poor immigrants from different continents and cultures, whose presence elsewhere in Europe has roiled a spreading right-wing reaction. In Schwyz, the new arrivals — about 2,000 to 3,000 a year — are mostly well-off, well-educated Europeans, an estimated 40 percent of them German, who have come to take specialized jobs the Swiss labor force can’t fill.An inflow of German-speaking specialists coming to work in a German-speaking region of Switzerland, where unemployment is 1.3 percent, hardly seems justification for populist outrage.Yet, according to Kurt Zibung, a member of Schwyz’s governing council and head of its economic department, people here voted on Feb. 9 “with their heart and their feelings.”“We have a very conservative area,” explained Mr. Zibung, member of a political party that opposed the referendum. “The vote was not against the foreigners. People are just afraid that they will destroy our culture.”The Feb. 9 referendum — narrowly approved by 50.3 percent of Swiss voters — sent shock waves across Europe, throwing into question interlocking treaties between the European Union and Switzerland, a nonmember, in effect since 2002. One allows citizens of European Union countries to work in Switzerland, and vice versa. Yet, most experts attribute Switzerland’s recent economic boom to the package deal with the Union that opened the door to European job seekers.“We’ve never been as rich as we are now,” said Peter Fischer, economics editor at Neue Zürcher Zeitung, an authoritative economic newspaper. “We have an open, healthy economy for which, yes, it is hard to find qualified people.”The vote on Feb. 9 revealed a divided country, with one half looking outward and the other half clinging to nostalgic notions defined by cows, Alps and picture-postcard villages. “In the last two decades, Switzerland has changed, and there is now a gap between identity and reality,” Mr. Fischer said.The fact is Switzerland has been faced recently with the daunting task of absorbing 80,000 foreigners a year, a lot for a country of eight million. Today, more than 20 percent of Swiss residents are foreigners, of which 85 percent are European, with Germans and Portuguese the largest groups.In a place like Schwyz, this puts a strain on the local population. According to Mr. Zibung, housing prices have doubled, traffic has increased, and young families are moving out.In the village of Muotatal, the conservative epicenter of the canton, one voter — a music teacher who declined to give her name — said she had voted for the immigration referendum without fully understanding its consequences.“It was just getting to be too much,” she said. “When the Swiss feel overwhelmed, we can’t manage.”Josef Gwerder, a shop owner in Muotatal, said that about 10 of the 23 apartments in his building were occupied by Austrians or Germans, many of them working in the local hospital or retirement homes.Mr. Gwerder voted against the initiative, but he said many of his neighbors felt disregarded by their own government and by extension, by the European Union. “Voting ‘yes’ was another way of voting ‘no’ to what’s going on,” he said.This sense of powerlessness is a sensitive subject in a country that prides itself on a tradition of direct democracy. “We are always a little bit afraid that other people are giving us rules that we don’t accept,” Mr. Zibung explained.