Next Tuesday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s name will appear on the Democratic primary ballot across New York State.But in the meantime, he seems determined to avoid discussing his re-election much at all.On Tuesday, the governor held one public appearance, at the Museum of Jewish Heritage in Lower Manhattan, to talk about his recent trip to Israel. He barely mentioned any of several major endorsements he had just received.He did make an unusual case that candidates’ debates could be bad for democracy. Then he heeded his own advice and skipped one.Mr. Cuomo’s primary challengers include Zephyr Teachout, a law professor, whose candidacy has attracted attention of late partly because of the governor’s simultaneous concern about it (he tried to get her removed from the ballot) and refusal to acknowledge it exists (he avoids uttering Ms. Teachout’s name).Mr. Cuomo’s campaign pointed out that other statewide Democratic officeholders in New York — including Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand, former Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton and Mr. Cuomo’s father, former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo — did not debate their opponents in past primaries.But Ms. Teachout and her camp nevertheless complained about the governor’s reticence.For months, Mr. Cuomo, who is heavily favored to win a second term, has seldom discussed his candidacy. During the legislative session, which ended in June, he responded to questions about politics by imploring reporters to wait until the political season.The dawn of that season is unclear. “The campaign season hasn’t really started yet,” he said on Monday, eight days before the primary, after marching in the West Indian American Day Parade. He then ended a question-and-answer session with reporters after two and a half minutes.On Tuesday, the governor, during his visit to the Museum of Jewish Heritage — which his office insisted was official business, not a political stop — again parried reporters’ questions on the topic.Shortly before, the state’s Democratic Party sent out news releases trumpeting Mr. Cuomo’s latest labor support, from the Hotel and Motel Trades Council, as well as endorsements he received from The Daily News and The Buffalo News.But Mr. Cuomo did not focus on those developments. Instead, he reflected on his 29-hour trip to Israel, more than two weeks ago, noting that he was the only governor to travel there amid the conflict in Gaza.Asked if the trip might also help him appeal to Jewish voters in a re-election year, Mr. Cuomo said: “I don’t know, in truth. I think it was clear that this was the time to go, right? You say it’s a political year. I frankly think, more relevant, it’s a period of conflict and war for Israel.”Mr. Cuomo was also asked about his refusal to debate and what message that sent about his “respect for democracy.”“I don’t think it has anything to do with democracy,” he replied. “I think it has to do with individual campaigns. Sometimes you have debates; sometimes you don’t have debates. It depends on the campaign. It depends on the issues.”“I’ve been in many debates that I think were a disservice to democracy,” he added. “So anyone who says debates are always a service to democracy hasn’t watched all the debates that I’ve been in.”When he was running for governor in 2010, Mr. Cuomo took part in only one debate: a seven-candidate free-for-all whose participants included a former madam.The debate Mr. Cuomo skipped on Tuesday night was to have been sponsored by NY1 and Time Warner Cable News in Albany. Instead, Ms. Teachout fielded questions alone in a pair of televised interviews.Mr. Cuomo’s running mate, former Representative Kathy Hochul, is also expected to skip a televised debate on Wednesday against Ms. Teachout’s running mate, Tim Wu, who is also a law professor.Mr. Cuomo is favored to prevail by a large margin over Ms. Teachout, who is not well known across the state. Polls have also shown him with a wide lead over his Republican opponent, Rob Astorino, the Westchester County executive, who has challenged Mr. Cuomo to hold eight regional debates before the Nov. 4 election.Costas Panagopoulos, a professor of political science at Fordham University, said Mr. Cuomo was making a strategic calculation by avoiding Ms. Teachout. Debating her, or responding to her criticism, could elevate her profile, he said, and also comes with the risk of making mistakes along the way.“This is a common strategy that front-runners adopt,” Professor Panagopoulos said. “When a candidate is virtually assured of victory, there are not many incentives for them to engage with their opponent directly.” (Ms. Teachout also teaches at Fordham.)Ms. Teachout and Mr. Wu were not pleased with Mr. Cuomo’s debate philosophy. Nor was Mark Green, the former New York City public advocate, who appeared with Ms. Teachout and Mr. Wu on Tuesday to give them his endorsement.Mr. Green, who lost to Mr. Cuomo in the primary for attorney general in 2006, pointed out that Mr. Cuomo’s father was a skilled debater. He recalled Mario Cuomo’s besting former Mayor Edward I. Koch in debates when the two men were seeking the Democratic nomination for governor in 1982. “If it was good enough for Mario,” Mr. Green said, “it really should be good enough for the sitting governor.”Ms. Teachout questioned Governor Cuomo’s explanation that debates could be a disservice to democracy.“I don’t think anybody understands what he means,” she said, “and maybe during a debate we’d get some clarification.”