WASHINGTON —  A street sign downtown promoting the mayoral candidacy of Muriel Bowser has a single word next to her name: Democrat. Over the four decades that this overwhelmingly left-leaning city has been electing mayors, that has been the only qualification voters have needed to hear.But the surprising strength of Ms. Bowser’s main opponent, a Republican turned independent, reflects the tectonic shifts in the city’s demographics and economy over the past several years. Combined with a weariness over continuing corruption scandals that have plagued Democrats, the contest seems to herald a new era of competitive races here, regardless of the outcome of this one.Ms. Bowser’s competitor, David Catania, is trying for a triple: to become the first white mayor since 1872, the first to be openly gay, and the first non-Democrat since 1974, when residents here began voting in public elections after a century of federal control.In the weeks before Election Day, Mr. Catania has trailed Ms. Bowser in the polls somewhere between 4 and 17 points — numbers that usually spell death in most races for the underdog, but in a city in which Democrats make up 76 percent of 456,633 registered voters, count as remarkably close.A surge of new residents in the past few years, roughly 80,000 of them new voters; a large number of undecided voters; and the presence of a third candidate, Carol Schwartz, another independent, combine to make the outcome less certain than the traditional two-way two-party contest.“This race has a fascinating set of circumstances,” said George Derek Musgrove, a historian at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County, who is writing a book on race and democracy in the District of Columbia.Chief among them, Professor Musgrove said, is the shrinking black population in this city of about 650,000 people. It declined 11 percent from 2001 to 2011, while the white population increased by 31 percent, and the Asian population increased, too.“No one knows how many new residents will vote, or in what numbers,” Professor Musgrove said.Further, he said, residents, particularly the poor, have looked at the record of the past three administrations on the key issues of education and affordable housing and seen little progress. “Folks don’t quite know if Muriel Bowser can deal with those two problems, so there is a critical mass of people who are willing to try something new.”Years of corruption scandals may also have soured city residents on the dominant party. Ms. Bowser, 42, a fifth-generation Washingtonian who has served as a councilwoman since 2007, defeated the incumbent, Vincent C. Gray, in last spring’s primary. Mr. Gray was sullied by a campaign fund-raising scandal that brought down one other council member and played a role in bringing down two more.While on the Council, Ms. Bowser has tended toward low-flying legislative targets like regulations on pawn shops. Her focus on neighborhood issues is her special sauce, her campaign says. “She has made a grass-roots effort to reach the entire district,” said Joaquin McPeek, her spokesman. “It’s what won her the primary and what we believe will win her the election next week.”Mr. Catania, 46, is from Kansas City, Mo., and has served on the City Council for 17 years in several prominent roles, such as chairman of the Health Committee, where he helped increase immunization rates for children citywide.Both candidates are focused on the city’s schools, which have been a central issue in mayoral races over the past decade as the rest of the city’s fortunes have improved.While Ms. Bowser has far stronger support among the city’s black voters, predominantly black neighborhoods do feature some of Mr. Catania’s signs, perhaps in a nod to his work in poorer areas on the eastern side of the city, where he announced his exploration committee for the mayor’s race.Mr. Catania has been frequently criticized for his temperament, which many who have worked with him have described as abrasive.“No one in the beginning of this campaign gave us much of a chance,” Mr. Catania said. “But for 17 years in public service, I have been a workhorse serving the needs of people. The establishment candidate is just offering more of the same.”The mayoralty of the District of Columbia holds a bit of outsize political importance here, because the city has no real voice in Congress and because of the hard-fought history of the job. In 1802, Congress made Washington an incorporated city and permitted residents to elect its Council, but it gave them a mayor appointed by the president. In 1872, residents lost the right to elect local leadership and it was not restored until 1973 when Congress passed the Home Rule Act, paving the way for city residents to elect a mayor and Council the next year.If elected, Ms. Bowser would carry on the tradition that began that year: serving as a black mayor in what was once a predominantly black city, something many voters of all races believe is important. As a Democrat, she would also represent the political leanings of the city.Others are less sure that the mayor’s party really matters. “I always vote for Democrats,” said Andrew Wiseman, 35, a cartographer who blogs about his gentrifying neighborhood, Columbia Heights. However, he is supporting Mr. Catania. “Catania doesn’t seem like a mainstream Republican at all. I don’t think Bowser has been very effective. A lot of people who vote Democrat agree with me.”The outcome may rest on how many new voters feel the same. “A lot of Democrats may say, ‘I am not excited, but I will turn out for her,’ ” Professor Musgrove said. “But I have absolutely no idea how exactly this is going to turn out.”