PETERBOROUGH, N.H. —  The two leading Republican candidates not named Donald J. Trump who most need a victory in the New Hampshire primary have wooed voters here by promoting their experience, their tough-mindedness and their seriousness.Now, as Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey and Jeb Bush grasp for some way to dissuade the proud New Hampshire electorate from supporting Mr. Trump, they are turning to a new, blunter instrument: guilt.“America is counting on you,” Mr. Christie said Sunday night in the century-old town hall here, his 40th question-and-answer session in the state. He repeated himself a few sentences later, in case the voters had missed the barely veiled warning.“There’s 14 of us today,” Mr. Christie said of the Republican field. “You all will take us from 14 to four or five. And those four or five are the only ones Americans are going to have to choose from other than Hillary Rodham Clinton. You have enormous responsibility.”On Monday night, speaking at the Christmas-bedecked American Legion hall in Alton, Mr. Bush picked up where Mr. Christie left off.“New Hampshire has a special place in our democracy,” Mr. Bush said at his 27th town-hall-style meeting, alluding to its tradition of holding the first primaries, shortly after Iowa’s caucuses. “I, for one, will entrust the voters of New Hampshire to make this decision disproportionately more than any other place. I’m totally confident that you all will maintain your position as first in the nation, that you will be discerning about this.”Drenching New Hampshire voters with praise has long been a staple of campaigns for the White House, with candidates holding up the image of civic-minded voters as paragons of democracy in hopes that some of it will pay off on Election Day.But in an unusual campaign in which the leading candidate lacks either of the qualities New Hampshire voters are said to demand — a command of policy details and commitment to one-on-one campaigning — his rivals are repurposing their paeans to play on the vanity and insecurities of the New Hampshire political-industrial complex.The don’t-screw-this-up pleadings to honor what many here see as their civic birthright reflect how anxious Mr. Bush and Mr. Christie are to find some way to bring down Mr. Trump, who leads his nearest competitor in New Hampshire by double digits in polls.There is a dash of Tony Soprano — nice little primary franchise you got there, be a shame if something happened to it — and a heap of Jewish mother. Or, perhaps, Italian mother.“Are you trying to imply that an Italian from New Jersey would use guilt?” Mr. Christie said with faux incredulity in an interview on Monday aboard his bus in Nashua. “I think what I’m saying to them is, it would be a shame for the country if New Hampshire makes the wrong choices. Guilt was a frequently used weapon of my mother. So some of it just comes out naturally.”But Mr. Christie did not deny that he was in effect telling New Hampshire voters not to send their reputation for discriminating tastes in candidates down the drain.“Yeah, that’s exactly what I’m saying,” he said, again invoking how much the “country is counting on them” and noting their “huge responsibility.”Mr. Bush can be just as blunt. Asked Saturday in Exeter how he planned to beat Mr. Trump, he aimed straight at Granite State privilege.“You’re the answer,” said Mr. Bush, the former Florida governor, to the attendees. “The question is will New Hampshire want to support a guy who might tarnish this extraordinary reputation that you have, which is first-in-nation status, where you make people walk through the hot coals each and every time they come, where you challenge people, where you help them learn how to get better at doing this.“New Hampshire is an extraordinary part of this process and I don’t think Donald Trump’s going to survive New Hampshire to be honest with you, because I have too much confidence in you all.”There are differences in the subtle shaming Mr. Bush and Mr. Christie employ. Mr. Bush is far more explicit about targeting Mr. Trump, while Mr. Christie, who would like to win some Trump voters, tends not to mention him directly. (“I’m not as judgmental about it as Jeb is,” Mr. Christie said.)Some of the state’s political pillars speak just as assuredly of Mr. Trump’s inevitable fall. This is partly a verse in the same hymnal from which Mr. Bush and Mr. Christie are reading.“They’re not going to throw away their vote,” predicted former Senator Judd Gregg, whose father was governor of New Hampshire and literally wrote the book on the state’s primary.Dismissing the polls showing Mr. Trump leading, Mr. Gregg, a Bush supporter, even said, “I’m willing to bet on Trump not winning here.”With renewed chatter from national party figures about whether Iowa and New Hampshire should be allowed to retain their first-to-vote privileges, the prospect of Mr. Trump’s winning here, and doing so without doing the sort of policy-heavy, on-the-ground campaigning the state prides itself on, is unnerving for leaders in both parties.“There will be people who say, ‘See, that’s why New Hampshire shouldn’t have the first primary,’” said Terry Shumaker, a longtime Democratic leader in the state, of how critics would seize on a Trump win. “It will be used.”In Peterborough, though, Mr. Christie said it did not have to come to that. He recalled a New Hampshire voter he had encountered who complained of being powerless over a turbulent election.“I looked at him, I said, ‘Stop it, powerless,’ ” Mr. Christie recounted, all but spitting out any suggestion of impotence. “You’re a voter in New Hampshire. You’re among the most powerful people in the world right now.”