One day this month, various politicians and officials convened outside the Sunset Park Library on Fourth Avenue in Brooklyn to announce an affordable housing initiative, the cornerstone of which would seem to be any progressive’s cotton candy and rainbow vision. To accommodate the neighborhood’s growing and largely immigrant population, the library would expand to nearly twice its current size as part of a project orchestrated by a nonprofit developer, the Fifth Avenue Committee, which would put 49 units of housing on top.The units would not be condominiums with Wolf appliances and grooming stations for corgis, but rental apartments made affordable to those with incomes roughly between $20,000 and $100,000, figures adjusted for family size. Some of the units are to be reserved for the very poor — those making even less than $20,000 a year — and others for formerly homeless survivors of domestic violence.In the aftermath of the Bloomberg era, though, when the subject is development and the leveraging of a public asset is in question, a trigger warning goes into effect for many New Yorkers — the presumption, or the belligerent certainty, being that no good can come from either.At the news conference in Sunset Park, demonstrators were on hand to denounce “gentrification” and stand up for libraries, even though the project at the center was conceived to forestall the former and vastly improve the latter. “There will be one-bedrooms for $600,” Representative Nydia M. Velazquez, who represents the area, told me later. “Here I am in front of this group saying, ‘Trust me, this is different, it won’t be business as usual.’ ”Over the past decade, rampant construction in New York, so little of it bringing any real benefit to working people, has led to a sense of distrust in local governance and its institutions, which has, in turn, prompted its own lapses of reason. This is especially true in Brooklyn, where change has seemed to happen so quickly and where libraries have increasingly become the focus of collective anxiety surrounding all of the transformation.Last month a public meeting to discuss the proposed renovation of the Cadman Plaza branch in Brooklyn Heights exceeded five hours and became so impassioned and theatrical that a resident called it “a breakdown of democracy.” Should the plan be approved, a private developer, Hudson, would rehabilitate a dilapidated building in need of $9 million in repairs, according to the Brooklyn Public Library, in exchange for the right to build condominiums on top of it and a requirement to build affordable housing in rapidly gentrifying Clinton Hill. The cost for a temporary library space that would be in use during construction would be picked up by the developer, and $40 million from the sale would go to serve other branches in the borough in urgent need of repair.A two-year-old group called Citizens Defending Libraries, founded by Michael D. D. White, a longtime resident of Brooklyn Heights, and his wife, Carolyn McIntyre, has led the opposition to the proposal on the broad ground that privatizing public space is an unequivocally terrible idea, and with the more specific complaint that the library will be shrunk. (The Brooklyn Public Library counters that in fact the new branch will have more accessible space and simply less dead space.)The group also objects to a plan to move the library’s business collection to the system’s Central Library in Prospect Heights, where administrators claim it will be more readily used. Adding to the group’s frustration is the sense among members that the library inflates the cost of its repairs to justify getting involved with developers (as if every library administrator secretly wished she were a builder).In July 2013, the Cadman Plaza branch closed seven times because of heat. The city’s Department of Design and Construction estimated the cost of replacing the air-conditioning system at $3.6 million, a figure Mr. White contends greatly exaggerates the problem. Indeed, we are in the land of HVAC-gate.What detractors fear is not simply the prospect of more development but the modernization of the libraries themselves, the notion that they would hold fewer books and reorient themselves to an evolving culture guided by technology. “We are not against digital books,” Mr. White told me. But he said, “If you switch over to digital books and keep books off-site, the library is no longer a zone of privacy.”  In the strange way of niche feuds in New York, Citizens Defending Libraries has a contentious relationship with a group called Urban Librarians Unite, which believes that if you are an advocate for libraries, you should be working to raise money for them rather than simply trying to stampede against creative strategies through which they might generate needed capital.“We are not crazy about the Brooklyn plan,” the group’s executive director, Christian Zabriskie, told me. “But we have done a lot of analysis on this through the lens of library science, and we see it as a viable solution. We would obviously prefer it if buildings weren’t sold off. But it’s the real world. I’d rather ride a unicorn to work, but I can’t.”The city’s 2016 budget includes the largest increase in operating and capital funding for libraries in the city’s history — a $378 million increase for capital spending and $46 million in new money for operating expenses. But the increases can’t meet the vast needs of the city’s three library systems. Brooklyn is in a curious position: It is arguably the global literary capital, but at the same time its library system has yet to become a fashionable philanthropic cause. It raises only $4 million a year from individuals and foundations; the New York Public Library raises more than 10 times that.In recent years I have had several people tell me that there is no point in giving money to the Brooklyn Library if it is simply going to stuff the wallets of developers. But maybe if more people had opened their own, we wouldn’t be here.