TOKYO — Legislators scuffled in Parliament and demonstrators took to the streets on Thursday as Japan’s governing coalition moved to secure final passage of contentious legislation that would loosen decades-old limits on the country’s military.The package of 11 bills was still tied up in Parliament’s upper house late Thursday night, past an initial deadline set by the government of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who has spent considerable political capital trying to convince a skeptical public that Japan should play a more assertive role in global military affairs.Scenes reminiscent of a rugby match played out in the committee chamber where lawmakers have been debating the bills for weeks. Opposition politicians tried to prevent voting by piling on top of the committee chairman and wresting away his microphone. Lawmakers from the governing party pulled them away and formed a protective scrum around the chairman to allow him to call the vote. The scenes were shown live on television by the national broadcaster, NHK.The committee eventually passed the bills, sending them to the full upper house for what is likely to be a final, decisive vote. The chamber, which is controlled by Mr. Abe’s Liberal Democratic Party and its ally Komeito, began deliberations late in the evening and was expected to work through the night to overcome procedural roadblocks thrown up by five opposition parties.If passed by the full house, the legislation would allow the Japanese military, known as the Self-Defense Forces, to cooperate more closely with the militaries of allies like the United States, by providing logistical support and, in certain circumstances, armed backup in international conflicts.It would be a significant shift for a country whose armed forces have not seen action since World War II. The United States imposed Japan’s pacifist Constitution after its wartime aggression, and antiwar sentiment remains widespread in Japanese society. In the past, the Self-Defense Forces have played noncombat roles in United Nations peacekeeping operations and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, but the use of force has been limited by law to the direct defense of Japan.“It’s unfortunate that the bills had to be approved this way, but they are absolutely necessary to protect the lives and happiness of the people,” Masahisa Sato, a former military officer and Liberal Democrat who is a member of the committee, said after the raucous session.Mr. Abe and other conservatives argue that the strictly defensive security policy that Japan has followed since the end of the war is inadequate to meet modern-day threats like the growing military power of China. Critics worry that abandoning the policy would lead to Japan’s becoming involved in unnecessary foreign wars, and they contend that the legislation violates Japan’s Constitution.“If bills can be passed in a violent way like that, then our country’s democracy is dead,” said Tetsuro Fukuyama, a committee member from the opposition Democratic Party of Japan.Winning final passage of the legislation would be an important victory for Mr. Abe, who has dedicated his career to correcting what he sees as an excessive, outdated national pacifism that is a legacy of Japan’s disastrous wartime experience.His defense agenda is opposed by a majority of the public, however, according to opinion polls. Demonstrators gathered in front of the Parliament building on Wednesday night as the committee moved toward its final session.Organizers put the number of demonstrators Wednesday night at 35,000, though the police said the crowd was about half that size. A few braved heavy rain to stay through the night and into Thursday, and the crowd swelled again on Thursday night.Mr. Abe’s coalition has enough members in the upper house to pass the bills, but the opposition is using a number of delaying tactics — like lodging procedural objections and blocking governing party lawmakers from entering committee rooms — to draw out the process.Though there is little they can do to prevent the bills’ ultimate passage, they may be hoping to further stoke public sentiment against the bills and inflict maximum political damage on Mr. Abe, whose support, measured in opinion polls, has slipped as debate over the legislation drags on.Parliament’s lower house approved the bills in July, under similarly tumultuous circumstances, and adoption by the upper house would ensure that they become law. Even if the upper house does not approve the bills, the government could send them back to the more powerful lower chamber, where it could use its overwhelming majority to override the upper house.