The American television punditocracy — the pollsters, political consultants and other talking heads who become as ubiquitous as air every election cycle — can be incestuous and herdlike. Its members spend a lot of time in New York and Washington greenrooms, preparing their assessments about “real Americans,” whom some pundits have even encountered, maybe at a highway rest stop.To watch their punditry in recent months has been to observe a tortured passage in comprehending the presidential candidacy of Donald J. Trump.First they were fascinated. Then they were in disbelief, explaining that polls weren’t always accurate. Then they were merely skeptical: The consensus was that it would be hard for him to win, but a few people started hedging their bets and comparing him to Ronald Reagan. Now the tone has shifted again, to acceptance: More and more, it is said that he may become the Republican nominee.Mr. Trump is an entertainer, bringing a rawness and wildness to the presidential race that no other candidate can come close to matching. His campaign is a cult of personality, and has been reported as such.And yet, win or lose, Mr. Trump could have a lasting effect on American politics, thanks to an ad hoc ideology and electoral coalition, animated by the anxieties of a post-Cold War, globalized world.That world has been disorienting for many middle- and working-class Americans. Work vanishes to faraway lands, and they are made to train their foreign replacements. A new fluidity in sexual, gender and cultural norms upsets traditional understanding. White Americans face the prospect of losing their majority status. The ultrarich seize on the opportunities of the new order and corner a growing proportion of the national income. Young voters hear they will be the first generation of Americans to fare worse than their parents.The atmosphere of change and anxiety provides a ripe opportunity for politicians. But Republican orthodoxy has limited the exploitation of working-class fears. The party mainstream is firmly in favor of free trade, low marginal-tax rates at the high end and legal immigration.Mr. Trump has dispensed with that orthodoxy. Reflecting the populist drift of the far right of the Republican Party, he has deftly played into the central fears of many voters: that their job security, cultural identity and general assumptions (and those of their children) are under assault from a variety of forces at home and abroad. And while he contends that sometimes the problem is too much government, he has been known to break from traditional Republicans and say the problem is too little government.His immigration plan, to build a wall on the border and deport undocumented immigrants, may be unfeasible and, as some argue, inhumane. His pledge to impose tariffs on foreign countries to keep factories in America may be a hard sell in Congress. His plan to raise taxes on hedge-fund managers who stash wealth in the Caribbean may be a nonstarter. What these impulses have in common, however, is a belief that in the 21st century, American freedoms are threatened not only by overbearing government, as his Republican colleagues tend to emphasize, but also by a more complex and diffuse set of forces.In the face of Republican near-consensus on the free market, Mr. Trump says, in his own way, that government can play a unique role in writing the rules of the marketplace and restraining the market when it fails people.Such ideas have grown unfashionable in our market-venerating era. A cool new utilitarianism has gained currency: If a million people lose $50,000-a-year jobs through trade, but 100 million save $501 a year by buying cheaper Chinese stuff — the surplus of which they spend on other things, in that way generating more jobs — the market consensus tells us we are better off.But pain is not transferable. One hundred savers at Walmart and one laid-off worker may cancel themselves out on a balance sheet, but in politics they are additive. Mr. Trump has, in his own way, understood that. Win or lose, that understanding could endure.