HAY-ON-WYE, Wales — In its remoteness, this tiny rain-soaked town in the Welsh countryside recalls Davos, home to the annual schmoozefest of international plutocrats and officialdom in the Swiss Alps.Like Davos, Hay-on-Wye is a long and winding drive from the nearest major airport yet still attracts hundreds of notable speakers to discuss issues of global import for one week of the year. Instead of hazardous ice, think tire-sinking mud. Instead of fur-lined snow boots, think Wellingtons.But that’s where the parallels end.There is no security and no entrance fee at the Hay Festival, which started in 1988 and has since grown into one of the most prominent literary festivals in the world. Anyone can wander in. Instead of bodyguards and advisers, participants bring their children. (One in five festival events is now dedicated to toddlers and teenagers.) Alongside Britain’s intelligentsia and curious types from all over the world, locals attend in droves to debate not just books, but anything from violent extremism to boundary-breaking science. The average price of the 800 one-hour sessions is about $10.And so every May, Hay’s population of 1,500 grows to over 70,000, as visitors flock to see the likes of Eric Schmidt, Kazuo Ishiguro, Toni Morrison, Amartya Sen, Sebastian Faulks, Colm Toibin and David Simon, to name a few of those who have recently attended. Last week, the actor Jude Law could be seen buying half a dozen books in the onsite festival bookstore. (“It turns out he is a big reader,” said Peter Florence, the local Welshman who founded the festival.) There are drawing workshops put on by the Royal Drawing School. High-minded sessions by economic laureates and climate change experts are interspersed with stand-up comedy and music.Former President Bill Clinton, who has attended in the past, called Hay the “Woodstock of the mind.” My colleague Sarah Lyall once described it as a Sundance for bibliophiles, minus the Hollywood swag. The bottom line is this: The Hay Festival democratizes inspiration. It is more human than most other idea fairs.Unsurprisingly, a new book titled “More Human” drew an audience of over a thousand here. Its author, Steve Hilton, a former senior adviser to Prime Minister David Cameron who was known for wandering around 10 Downing Street barefoot, denounced the dehumanization of government and the disconnectedness of “an insular ruling elite.” The United States, he says, has become a “donocracy,” and Britain a democracy in name only, benefiting “a tiny elite no matter the electoral outcome.”A visiting scholar at Stanford University, Mr. Hilton proposes radically decentralizing bureaucracies and putting “people at the center.” He wants to pay bankers in institutions that are “too big to fail” at the level of civil servants and ban children from having smartphones. He also wants to ban factory farming and shut down what he calls modern “factory schools” in favor of a much greater number of smaller, more diverse, competing educational establishments. (Back in Silicon Valley, one of his sons went to a school with eight students, all taught in their teacher’s backyard, he said.)“We build these systems that make people behave in ways that are inhuman,” Mr. Hilton said. Politics, he added, needs to come back to “a more human scale, more local and more accountable.”It was a theme that played well with the Hay audience, even if it prompted some to point out that Mr. Hilton — with his degree from Oxford and time spent in government — was very much part of the elite he so vocally attacked.The point about elites, he retorted, was not to get rid of them but to open them up — in other words, to make them a little less like Davos and a little more like Hay.By Sunday, when this year’s festival came to a close, the best-selling authors at the bookstore were not the big household names. Instead, a Serbian activist with a five-point guide to starting a revolution, Srdja Popovic, and a young neuroscientist from the University of Cambridge, Hannah Critchlow, who wired up fellow writers and mapped creativity and brain activity, were among the unofficial stars of the week.Like Mr. Hilton, the Hay Festival is a “tiny bit of California coming to Wales,” said Mr. Florence, the festival’s founder. This year, even the sun was shining, for which Mr. Hilton took full credit.