Looking to break out of your cultural rut?The Times’s critics have you covered.‘What We Do in the Shadows’Set in modern-day Wellington, New Zealand, Jemaine Clement and Taika Waititi’s weird and witty mockumentary turns the daily lives of four vampire housemates into a dotty look at oldsters struggling to adapt to an unwelcoming modernity. (Jeannette Catsoulis)(No rating, 1:25. Read the review or find a streaming option.)Girlpool In his review of the duo’s new album, “Before the World Was Big,” Ben Ratliff writes:(Read the full review or listen on Spotify.)Alvin Ailey American Dance TheaterThe company opens its Lincoln Center engagement on Wednesday with the Ailey Spirit Gala, featuring young dancers from Ailey II, the Ailey School and AileyCamp. On Thursday, the hip-hop choreographer Rennie Harris unveils his new “Exodus,” a darkness-to-light journey set to house and gospel music, alongside a new production of Talley Beatty’s 1960 “Toccata,” Christopher Wheeldon’s “After the Rain” pas de deux and Alvin Ailey’s “Revelations.” To ring in Mr. Harris’s premiere, Thursday’s events begin outdoors at 6 p.m. with a house dance class taught by Eddie Stockton. Siobhan Burke(Wednesday through June 21. Find more at ailey.org.)American Folk Art Museum: ‘When the Curtain Never Comes Down’A sprawling cacophony of objects, audiotapes, photographs and films is here orchestrated into a curatorial marvel. Strange and wonderful in numerous ways, the show sheds new light on the performance aspects of much outsider art while reminding us how eccentricity is not only basic to creativity but also to personal liberty and democracy itself. Roberta Smith(Through July 5. Read the full review. More at folkartmuseum.org.)Blue Note Jazz FestivalNow celebrating its fifth anniversary, this festival runs all month long at a clutch of affiliated spaces in Manhattan. Highlights in the coming week include the veteran blues man Buddy Guy, on Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 p.m. at the B. B. King Blues Club & Grill; the Bad Plus with the tenor saxophonist Joshua Redman, drawing from a new album, on Wednesday at 7:30 and 10 p.m. at the Highline Ballroom; and the drummer Roy Haynes, headlining the Blue Note Jazz Club on Tuesday and Wednesday, with sets at 8 and 10:30 p.m. Nate Chinen(Through June 30. A full schedule is at bluenotejazzfestival.com.)