CAIRO — When protesters in Yemen succeeded in ousting President Ali Abdullah Saleh in 2012, their success stirred hopes for change in a place that had suffered mightily from poverty and corruption for decades under his autocratic rule.President Obama said at the time that Yemen could serve as a model for peaceful transition in the Middle East. The developments raised the possibility that power would flow to marginalized groups, and seemed especially promising for women, who played a central role in the revolt and were guaranteed seats in a national conference convened to chart the country’s future.Instead, Yemen is now unraveling, torn apart by civil war and under aerial attack by a military coalition led by Saudi Arabia. Nearly 2,000 people have been killed and hundreds of thousands displaced in the fighting.The demands of the protesters who gathered against Mr. Saleh are a memory that grows ever more distant, and raw: Mr. Saleh remains a potent force in Yemen’s politics, directing henchmen in feared security forces that still do his bidding. Over the years, he has taunted his detractors with frequent television appearances and interviews, dismissing the Arab Spring protests as a foreign conspiracy, and vowing never to leave Yemen.Many place blame for the current crisis on a transitional plan brokered by the Persian Gulf states that favored incremental change and stability over full-throated democracy, and that was ultimately no match for a political system dominated by powerful men and built on patronage and graft. The transitional deal gave Mr. Saleh immunity from prosecution for past crimes and transferred power to his long-serving and uninspiring deputy, Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi.Yemen’s Western allies, including the United States, were accused of focusing disproportionately on security threats, like Yemen’s powerful branch of Al Qaeda, at the expense of confronting important economic and political issues. Last year, the Houthis, a northern Yemeni rebel group, seized on the popular dissatisfaction and stormed the capital, setting off yet another political crisis. As tensions festered, political violence turned to civil war.Some of the activists who had protested against Mr. Saleh were killed, victims of the spreading violence; others fled the country. Belquis Al Lahabi, seen in the video above, was one of the women who held a seat in the national dialogue. She fled to Jordan after her house was destroyed by an explosion in April, and does not want to return.