ALBANY — The legislators were annoyed. The state official testifying before them did not have many answers. And the subject of her appearance — the “multiyear transformation” of New York’s information technology system — had been pretty much cast aside.Instead, the official, Maggie Miller, newly appointed as chief information officer, faced a barrage of questions on a newly delicate matter: Why had Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s administration put in place a policy of automatically deleting state workers’ emails after 90 days?“All I can say is that I fully support the policy,” Ms. Miller told one lawmaker at the hearing on Feb. 26.Another asked her whether “any other government, anywhere” had a comparable policy; she cited no government, nowhere. And she was also asked: Who came up with the idea in the first place?“It was already in place, I’m afraid, so I don’t know,” she said.Frustrated at the meager explanation and alarmed at the prospect of a virtual incineration of records, some lawmakers are looking to change state law to forbid the email purges, and government watchdog groups have demanded that the Cuomo administration rescind its policy.On Thursday, Albany reacted in a way that only Albany can. It began with the introduction of two separate, but somewhat similar, bills seeking to preserve emails from deletion for at least seven years. By late afternoon, the office of the attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, announced it would suspend its policy of automatically deleting emails while it considered a different approach.Finally, that evening, the governor’s office weighed in, indicating it would be willing to adopt a new email policy for the state, as long as it also included Freedom of Information Law requirements that would apply equally “to all state officials and agencies.” (The Legislature is subject to the Freedom of Information Law in only a limited manner.)The retention of emails has become a charged issue, recently coming to the fore with Hillary Rodham Clinton, who has faced questioning about her use of a personal email account while serving as secretary of state. Some aides to Mr. Cuomo, who like Mrs. Clinton is a Democrat, have also used private email accounts for government business, though the administration has denied the practice.The criticism of the Cuomo administration’s email policy echoes a familiar critique of the governor, whose management style has a distinctly clandestine streak. He and his aides go out of their way to avoid leaving a paper trail, relying on messages sent through BlackBerry phones, and his administration has often chafed at requests under the Freedom of Information Law.Mr. Cuomo’s aides said the governor’s office had been deleting emails after 90 days since at least 2007, when Eliot Spitzer was governor and Mr. Cuomo was attorney general. Mr. Cuomo, in fact, adopted a similar policy for the attorney general’s office.The Cuomo administration expanded the policy across state agencies in 2013, but it has come under recent scrutiny as the state has finished rolling out a centralized email system and applied the deletion policy in a uniform fashion. State workers must now manually select the emails that should be preserved beyond 90 days.Some lawmakers, including State Senator Liz Krueger, have faulted the policy as a threat to government accountability. In a democracy, “we’re supposed to have open and transparent government, which means having access to information you need to evaluate your government,” Ms. Krueger said in an interview.She and Assemblyman Daniel J. O’Donnell, who were among Ms. Miller’s inquisitors, sponsored one of the bills. Ms. Krueger added of the email purges, “Ninety days is not only an arbitrary cutoff, it’s a ridiculously short cutoff.”Mr. O’Donnell had similar concerns. “I think if the New York Assembly announced tomorrow that we were going to take up this policy, Preet Bharara would be at the court door making sure that we did not,” he said at the hearing, referring to the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, whose office has brought a number of corruption cases against legislators.The ubiquity of email has created a new set of challenges for officials and archivists alike, who, instead of filling cartons with written correspondence, must grapple with the virtual expanse of electronic communications that now course through sprawling bureaucracies.States must figure out how to cull messages worth preserving from the large quantity of emails that often are ephemeral in nature, said Vermont’s state archivist, Tanya Marshall, who is president of the National Association of Government Archives and Records Administrators. “Part of the challenge with email is it’s such a large system that everybody partakes in,” Ms. Marshall said. “Different states have taken different strategies — or maybe no strategy.”Aides to Mr. Cuomo argued that the state’s policy was being wrongly portrayed as nefarious, asserting that the emails whose content makes them qualify as government records will be properly retained. Bristling at the characterization of Mr. Cuomo as secretive, they also said similar policies existed in the corporate world and in other governments.State officials have not offered a detailed rationale for the policy. Cost or physical limitations would not seem to be obstacles: Under the new email system, every state worker has a large amount of email storage. The main reason given for the policy, as Ms. Miller said in a statement, was to “increase efficiency.”The bill proposed by Ms. Krueger and Mr. O’Donnell, who are Manhattan Democrats, would require emails to be preserved permanently for senior officials, in addition to the seven-year requirement for other state workers. Another Democrat, Assemblyman Jeffrey Dinowitz of the Bronx, introduced his own bill on Thursday that would require longer or permanent retention of email while forbidding the use of private email accounts for government business. The Senate majority leader, Dean G. Skelos, a Republican from Long Island, has said he would support legislation to change the email policy.Groups that advocate government transparency have also been trying to persuade Mr. Cuomo to rethink the policy.“The governor’s policy creates an electronic shredder that’s always on and shreds emails along with government transparency,” said John Kaehny, executive director of Reinvent Albany, an advocacy group. The group was on a long list of organizations, which also included the Sunlight Foundation, the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the New York Civil Liberties Union, that sent a letter to the governor in January requesting that the state save employees’ emails for at least seven years.A spokesman for Mr. Cuomo, John P. L. Kelly, said the governor did not use email for government business. And his work-related communications through other means do not leave much of a footprint.Last year, The New York Times sought records of his phone calls, emails, text messages and a type of BlackBerry-to-BlackBerry communications — known as PIN messages — for a period of 10 weeks. The governor’s office responded by providing heavily redacted phone logs and said it had no other records.