NATIONALAn article last Thursday about the end of the walleye fishing season in Minnesota gave an incorrect guide for the pronunciation for Mille Lacs Lake, where the fishing has been halted. It is mill-LACKS, not mill-LACK.BUSINESS DAYAn article on Tuesday about the choice of Robert Steven Kaplan, a former Goldman Sachs executive, as president of the Dallas Federal Reserve Bank misstated, in some copies, the name of the public interest group with which Ady Barkan, who commented on the selection process, was affiliated, and a correction in this space on Wednesday misstated Mr. Barkan’s role there. It is the Center for Popular Democracy, not the Center for Public Democracy, and he is director of the center’s Fed Up campaign, not of the center itself.•An article on Saturday about SFX Entertainment’s effort to sell itself misstated an earlier bid from its founder, Robert F. X. Sillerman. He offered $5.25 a share, not $5.75.SPORTSThe Keeping Score column on Aug. 11 about the Toronto Blue Jays’ record having caught up to statistical expectations misstated, in some editions, the Chicago Cubs’ expected record based on their run differential at the time. It was 57-53, not 57-43.THE ARTSA listing of credits on Monday with a theater review of “Sweat,” at the Angus Bowmer Theater in Ashland, Ore., misspelled the surname of the associate director. She is Rebecca Wear, not Ware.STYLEAn article last Thursday about the summer ritual of checking for ticks referred incorrectly to their seasonal biting behavior. Though ticks are dormant when the temperature drops below 40 degrees, they can become active again if winter temperatures rise. Ticks do not always stop biting after a fall freeze.The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.comor left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.