Walt Disney didn’t just build a theme park for childhood fantasy. He created a world we believe in, and a journey to the land of the better self.A few years ago I was driving around Hollywood in a rental car I’d inherited from the folk singer Beth Orton. We were guests under the Hollywood sign, Beth had a small baby, and it was time for her to go back to London and I kept the car. People leave stuff behind in a car; you get to know them by their parking stubs and beverage stirrers. But Beth’s an original: She left me a CD compilation of the best of the Disney songs, and I cried for two weeks as I drove up Santa Monica Boulevard or over Laurel Canyon or to the beach. I cried in Griffith Park and on the freeway to a shopping mall in Sherman Oaks. I wasn’t sad; I was just, well, Disneyfied — enjoying the small tearful yearnings that come with those songs. One night I stopped at a beautiful edge on Mulholland Drive and looked at the twinkling lights of the city, the years seeming to roll back with Louis Armstrong’s version of “When You Wish Upon a Star.”Fate is kindShe brings to those who loveThe sweet fulfillment ofTheir secret longing.If modern sentiment has an architecture, it was Disney that built it. Disney furnished the house and chose the curtains, Disney stocked the fridge. In time, the power of Disney came to light up your hall and your landing, its vapors making their way over your vacuumed carpets and into the minds of your children. Disney offers a hand to anybody who ever dreamed that the earth is all of heaven we shall ever know. To love color, to love style, to know yourself in an element of fantasy, is to think in the terms forged by Walt Disney. Driving the roads that summer on the West Coast, I understood the significance of an ideal that had never felt wrong or tired — it was the Disney aesthetic, a delicate passion ruled by hope, a sense of necessary invention, and yet a sense of loss always embedded at the root of every extravagance.I first saw a Disney film in the Scottish industrial town of Kilmarnock, on a typically cold and wet day in the 1970s. When foreigners think of Scotland they often think of beautiful mountains and deep shadowy glens, apple-cheeked girls wearing tartan, men in kilts drinking whisky and staring bravely into the future. In other words: They think of “Brigadoon.” But it’s worth remembering that when Arthur Freed, the well-known producer of musicals at MGM, was scouting locations for that film, he came back from Scotland disappointed, complaining it didn’t look “Scottish enough.” So the town of Kilmarnock — despite being the place from where the great poet Robert Burns published his debut poems, the famous Kilmarnock edition — was a place where dreams had traditionally come crashing down. The cinema was half-empty, and I was young enough to need a booster seat, but I’ll never forget it, the return of “Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs,” which seemed to me like a vision of higher possibility.Never for a second did it appear to me implausible. Never for a moment did it look unreal or exaggerated or in any way fake. If it was fabricated or designed, then it appeared so, to me, only in the way life was fabricated or designed: Snow White and her prince and her little friends were agents in a social-realist drama, a description of society and moral life that was fundamentally true and based on observed experience. I knew it was high end. I knew it was dreamy. But it was not impossible, and it seemed we all had an obligation to live as colorfully as that, if only the gods and the reality managers would allow it. My love affair with America started when a lady from old Europe looked in a magic mirror and saw a pretty girl. My entire sense of work and play, of domestic life and love, was informed by that film, and stamped American, not because I recognized it from life, but because I wanted to. I was too young to recognize the look — the German Expressionist aspect of that film, by way of Gustave Doré — but it seeped into my unconscious and expanded for all time my wish to transport myself. My father was beside me. He believed in the innate absurdity of human effort, and the habits of the dwarfs delighted him. It’s all tangled up now — it always is, and that’s how Disney captures you for life, by generating tenderness mingled with regret — but the singing of “Heigh-Ho” on the car journey home will always stay with me as part of the lost essence of my family.Walt Disney spent part of his childhood in Marceline, Mo., a railroad town and former prairie, 120 miles northeast of Kansas City. Its central street in the early 1900s, when Disney was a child, became a model for an idea of American happiness, and a version of it, Main Street, U.S.A., is the first thing you come across in Disneyland Park in California. Before he became king of the irresistible falsehood, Walt Disney was merely a child, and in his works we might understand what Freud viewed as the foolishness of American democracy. The Disney view of happiness — embodied in a perfect street, a cast of animals, a fairy-tale castle, a bunch of rides — might be foolish but it is also attuned to the habits of modern yearning. Freud was for bringing illusions to an end, whereas Walt Disney was for bringing them to fruition, and, in those two views of human progress, we might argue that Disney’s was the more forgiving of the human condition. In the world of Disney, we feel homesick for a home that never really existed, yet everything we care about, whether being loved or feeling right or having fun or looking good, stems from a set of narcissistic compulsions that Disney embraced and built to graphic completion. That is his contribution, and, however foolish, however impossible in the end, it gives life to the notion that happiness is a creation, something made rather than inherited, a beautiful, necessary lie. A poet once said, “There are plenty of ruined buildings in the world but no ruined stones.” But who can live in a world of stones? One might argue, along with Walt Disney, that the reality we love is the reality we bought into.I brought my daughter, Nell, and her aunt Sophia. In the British way, Sophia isn’t really her aunt, but she’s helped bring Nell up, and is family. I was thinking as the plane took off about modern Disney’s design for living and how expensive it is. If you ask a young Russian or an Iranian who love America why they love it, they believe it is a happiness mall. They believe you can pay your way to being anything you fancy and that it represents a kind of genius, possessed and managed by corporations. They speak of Apple and Disney, Coke or Ralph Lauren, all the entertainment, technology and fashion companies, as if they harvest the atoms of well-being and sell them to the world, and this, to young non-Americans directed by such dreams, is the meaning of freedom today. Especially Disney, because Disney usually comes with a song and a doll your child can take to bed. My daughter was excited for Disneyland, she said, because it was like going on a magic journey. She asked if the shops would be open all day and all night and whether the food was free. “Nothing is free, darling,” I said, “but it is free to you and that’s why it’s a treat. We’re going to have a wonderful time.”I think the gods of reality like revenge. They were watching us. Flying over the Atlantic, I woke up shivering and with swollen sinuses and a feeling of a coming flu like a gathering storm, a tempest in my happiness firmament, and I perceived from that moment a kind of Miltonic rebellion rising inside my head. A writer, you might say, is someone with an acute interest in oppositions, and our journey toward Disneyland was by necessity going to involve a certain conjuring with misery. My body did it by itself. And by the time we were standing at reception in Disney’s Grand Californian Hotel & Spa, I was sneezy, I was dozy, I was happy but suffering a private existential crisis about what happiness meant. The hotel, to me, is a mountain chalet as imagined by Lewis Carroll and Charles Rennie Mackintosh. It is a riot of wooden balconies and iron flowers, which they say are inspired by the California Arts & Crafts movement. Disney music, that endless, tinkling sound of make-believe and mend, was playing through the universe — or was it just the street? — and I lay on the Disney bed and felt simply awful. And it felt like a crime. It felt like a crime against fantasy and against good times. We’d traveled all our lives to this spot of loveliness, and now I was roiling on the pillows and asking for the company doctor? As it happened, there wasn’t one, and I was put through to a medical call center somewhere in Anaheim. Let me just say that a part of me will forever be lying bravely on that bed in Disneyland, with grinding bones and head of fire, while the music from “The Lion King” mocks me from the window.Nell came back that evening levitating with gladness. It was as if she’d met the world as it really should be, and it was bliss to see her so full of faith. Walt Disney wanted to build a place that would stand against the horrors of the known world, where rockets were Golden Zephyrs, not nuclear weapons, where trains could be any color of the rainbow, made for the transport of children, not prisoners. And where every fear came wrapped in a yelp of sheer delight. With Disneyland, Walt Disney felt he was giving America a better version of itself: “The idea of Disneyland is a simple one,” he wrote in a prospectus for the park. “It will be a place for people to find happiness and knowledge. It will be a place for parents and children to share pleasant times in one another’s company; a place for teacher and pupils to discover greater ways of understanding and education. Here the older generation can recapture the nostalgia of days gone by, and the younger generation can savor the challenge of the future.” The press opening, on July 17, 1955, was a fiasco — there was no drinking water, many of the attractions closed early and the TV broadcast was wild and amateur — and one might argue that the design and the idea of Disneyland has a fear of disaster embedded in it. Happiness, after all, is like that. We can hardly live with happiness for the fear of it suddenly ending. In the days after I left Disneyland, I walked through Los Feliz looking, as it were, for the footprints of Walt Disney, the man. Some have said he was a person with demons, and perhaps creating his own small world was a kind of compensation. In any case, what he created was a new way of thinking about life and dreaming, a kind of American Eden linked from his day to ours by an unfailing investment of common belief and a love of invention and dollars.He found a key in memory, and built, in Disneyland, a resort that both creates memories and indulges them. By going there as adults, we are visiting a part of our belief system that experience has failed to dull, and, for our children, we are creating a memory with the hope that the same thing will happen for them. Mr. Disney had a genius for bridging the gap between childhood and adult longing and he made a universal out of that, as well as a brand. Of the thousands of reviews left on TripAdvisor, one sums this up for me. It’s from a woman called Kathryn in New Zealand, left on May 31, 2015, with the headline: “I felt like the best parent in the world”: “My husband and I grew up watching Disney every Sunday night. For us, going to Disneyland had always been a dream…. We always knew we wanted to take our children there, and we got the opportunity last Christmas. When we walked in, I felt like crying with happiness, and over the three days we visited, that feeling never went away.”Nell came into our hotel room with a rasping love of the place that got me up from my philosophical sickbed. We went into the Disney California Adventure Park and found ourselves in a colored clamshell, entering the Little Mermaid: Ariel’s Undersea Adventure, a ride in the Paradise Pier section. Lights and cold air gave us the illusion of floating underwater, and Nell looked up at me to see if I was believing. “This is awesome,” I said.“A bit awesome,” she said.“You mean, ‘not really’?”“I dunno. I like her face,” she said. By this point in the ride Ariel was singing “Part of Your World” and every fiber in my sick being was saying “Yes. Yes, we are.”“I think Daddy likes it more than me,” Nell said.Reader, I am not beyond shame. But I was so happy I wanted to cry. I suddenly needed to live in this lagoon with all these fake bubbles. Nell is one of life’s natural stylists. She might only be 11 but she knows what’s what. When we stood in front of a giant painted billboard near Mickey’s Fun Wheel, and Sophia went to take a picture, Nell started doing the Charleston and I felt that the best spirit of all the best girls resided in my daughter. She ate a corn dog and we ate popcorn and bad food never tasted so good.My daughter responded immediately to the idea of America as a built environment and of Americans as built too, by themselves. I think we all do. I took Nell to Paradise Pier in the hope she’d feel like Dorothy in the land of Oz, and she did, seeming entitled to her own large sense of belonging in a place that she’d dreamt of. And that place, Disneyland, is then a part of parental self-creation: In America, in Disneyland, you’re all the father or mother you can imagine yourself to be, creating — along with the Imagineers — a place for childhood that is larger and purer than you remember it being the first time round. So that is an evening we will always remember, the evening we looked up and imagined the sky too must be Disney.“Less is a bore,” said the American architect and writer Robert Venturi. And the year I was born he was tracing maps of desire onto parking lots and the Las Vegas Strip. During my time in Disneyland I thought about him a lot and believed his thinking was slightly like that of most 11-year-olds today, who live in a world of super graphics and aesthetics linked to shopping. On day two, Nell and I had our only argument of the trip about her constant wish to be in the Disney shop. Absurdly, I tried to argue that we didn’t come all this way to buy rubbish. But of course we did. Floating over the emptiness of the parks in the minutes before they opened each morning was the pall of prepurchase. “I really want some ears,” said Nell, “like really, really. It would just be weird not to have them.” And not being weird is what Disneyland is all about, in a weird sort of way. The idea of buildings being symbols of what they are — of a concession stand shaped like a hot dog, a swimming pool that looks like a wave — is not only accessible to children but makes perfect sense to them. To be a child is to look at the horizon and see your desires. When Nell wanted an ice cream she simply looked for the building that looked that way. Life should be like this, she seemed to say — legible, self-representational, literal and witty. The world on her iPod Touch is like that, and her mind looks for scenographic explanations of what’s going on. Communication has enslaved her generation to iconography — to symbols, logos and graphics as familiar as family. And to her and to Robert Venturi, that is always going to feel like freedom. Venturi tries to argue us out of our adult complacency. “Let us remember,” he writes, “that throughout the history of architecture and urbanism, iconography has always dominated the scene, instructing and persuading us with its religious and civic content in ways no different from today’s vigorous (and despised) commercial iconography. Let us acknowledge the validity of those signs as a flourishing element within that vital, generic American scene, as well as within the great tradition of architecture and urbanism! Let us today transfer the murals from the inside to the outside of the buildings!”As an adult in Disneyland, you’re subconsciously waiting for answers. But mainly you’re just waiting. The boredom of waiting vies with sudden thrill, in the same way that happiness always competes with fear. The resort is full of frights and angular delights, but modern children are hard-core, and the park must cater to a certain amount of near-horror. Arguably, in the days of warty witches bearing questionable apples, it used to be more psychological, but today’s screen princesses are savvier, more materialistic — as are their fans — and one can feel that fashion virtues outdo ordinary virtues in the kingdom of “Frozen.” Cascading stardust must seem to be the opposite of spilled blood, but actually each is thrilling in its own way. There is something non-negotiable in how the children, especially the young girls, especially my own daughter, see access to princesshood, and beauty generally, as a power grab and a way to have everything they want and still keep singing. In one of the shops — I always lose arguments — they offer a “Frozen” makeover service for girls who want the look. Gary, the storefront operator who looked like an extra from “Glee,” twirled, curled and generally outgirled the gaggle of tiny females surrounding him. Nell played it cool — she knows her beauty secrets — but her eyes widened when he showed her the book of hairstyles. “That one, please,” she said.“Princess Nell, you will be the belle of all the balls in the universe,” Gary said.“Just one ball would suffice,” I muttered, under my breath.“Daddy’s getting a little tired, isn’t he, Princess Nell?”“He’s always like that.”“Well, we know all about tired daddies here. You just sit down, Daddy, and we’ll get on with turning Nell into the princess she has always been.”It was 35 dollars. And all these girls — complete strangers to what they had — were primped, braided, gelled, glittered and generally, but equally, made to look like mini-adult punk girls with no faith in natural beauty. Nell kept making faces at me from the chair. Even though she couldn’t see it yet, she knew it was rubbish, but it was “Frozen.” I found it a bit strange seeing all these small girls in a row, learning how hard one has to work for every grain of enchantment. When Gary and the girls had done with Nell, they all stood back, ready to spin the chair to the mirror. “Are you ready, Princess?” he asked. And as one, the staff shouted, “Let it go!”“Cool, thank you,” she said, very politely, inspecting her new postapocalyptic hairdo. “Can we go to Autopia now? I’m really desperate to drive.” It must be one of the secrets of Disney that so many of their stories problematize childhood, as opposed to celebrating it. Very few of the kids in Disney are just getting on with being young. They are often ersatz children, like the Seven Dwarfs, or ageless children who never grew up, like Peter Pan and the Lost Boys, or children who are made of wood, like Pinocchio, or children’s favorite stand-in, animals. And the stylistics of Disneyland depend on the idea, not that childhood is an awfully great adventure, but that adulthood is, especially American adulthood, with its cars, its fantastic journeys, its fearful secrets and its love of prospecting for gold and spending it. We went on the cars a few times, just so Nell could feel like a person in control of her environment. She’d torn the princess hairdo out by now, and was free-wheelin’ in some California of the mind, like a mini Joan Didion.Since Disney took over Marvel and Pixar, it has reinvigorated itself as the world’s chief purveyor of happiness narratives. But has it changed human nature? Can a $49 billion conglomerate still keep its flair for opening up hearts and minds? I mean, if Disneyland is an alternative world, a better world than actuality allows, how can it be preserved as such, without Real World Problems climbing over the fence? My days in Disneyland helped cure my sickness, not because of any profound (or even basic) medical provision, but because it reminded me that the bloods of happiness are thicker than the waters of discontent. But when we got to Autopia, I saw that children can be what Saul Bellow called “reality instructors,” perpetually animating the world around them with harsh self-interest. Nell’s a mean driver, and the boy in front was nervous and slow, and he kept stopping. I wanted to bump him — I’m even meaner than she — but she got through it by turning him into a figure of derision. You can give people sunshine, you can give them Mickey wristbands linked to their parents’ credit cards, as they do at Disney World, but in the end you can’t stop them wishing to drive off the tracks and smash their way into an individual fantasy of their own. Disneyland, a bit like the garden in Milton’s “Paradise Lost,” is a place with no need for a police force, because sin doesn’t exist and can barely even be imagined. But for the sociopathic among us, the greatest happiness of the greatest number will always find itself challenged by a basic wish to drive your car off the rails and go harum-scarum into the sunset. We didn’t want to hurt anybody, but we did want to assert our own sense of chaos amid the uniform gladness. I might be a bad parent, but I applaud my daughter for that, for not being a happiness machine.Enchantment is a melting pot, but we remain ourselves in the end. Disneyland is only a democracy for those who can afford to get in, and, even then, your spending power will continue to put pressure on your sense of freedom. As we swept round on the Golden Zephyr, I felt we were part of a simple factor of joy and on the Grizzly River Run we held on to each other as if meeting the thrill together was an unforgettable thing. In the Enchanted Tiki Room, when the mechanical birds opened up and sang to us, I felt much more than myself, much more than the emperor of ice cream and a lovely girl’s daddy: I felt transported into her realm of astonishment as her eyes blazed with wonder. How lucky to be there. How amazing to live in a world where Disney can do that and we can pay. There are alleged to have been departmental stand-offs and a great variety of difficulties over the modernizing of Disney’s resorts, and we won’t be going into them here, but it seems to me that the main achievement of the MagicBand, the wristband that allows customers to enter their hotel rooms, enter the parks and gain meals, is that it adds to the heavenly unreality of the place. You feel you’re not paying. In paradise, there is no need for money and no need for admonishment; one simply floats on an air of entitlement, and hopes that human nature and human insufficiency won’t intrude.The greatest ride in Disneyland, as you might see, is the ride through one’s own ambivalence. And that is how it should be. Disneyland is a beautiful attempt at the impossible, and the impossible is not always beautiful. I hadn’t stopped coughing by the time we made it to the first parade through Disneyland’s main thoroughfare, but I’d stopped complaining about it, and at Nell’s instigation I was beginning to see in Disney colors. The fireworks were part of it, the pink castle another, and the parade floats, full of waving and dancing characters, came to seem the most natural way to end a day of sweet experiences. “She looked at me,” Nell said of the lady passing in the shape of a dancer from “Aladdin.” “He pointed at me,” she said of one of the chimney sweeps on the “Mary Poppins” float, and I believed her. In Disneyland, every child feels chosen, and why wouldn’t you empty your bank account to see that happen, when the child is yours? Show-business values abounded, and only a curmudgeon, or a writer, would choose to question the authenticity of the performers’ smiles or ask how much they are being paid. Night came on in a blaze of trumpets, and I simply didn’t care anymore. I had joined the merry band, and fell into the happy void of my daughter’s capacity for wonder, as F. Scott Fitzgerald understood it.The structures of sentiment are nowhere better displayed. Disneyland is still in essence a 20th-century domain of imminent perfection. I feel that many a father before me, in his private self, hoped that, when the bomb comes, he would be in the teacups with his daughter, gently turning, turning gently, while believing that those odd streaks across the sky are merely the fireworks that nightly light up the windows of Main Street. “Let’s go and find Mickey Mouse,” Nell said. And in that moment the sky was ours and the evening too.“Where will we find him, darling?”And she smiled at me. “In his house, of course.”