There was a moment at the Republican debate in Cleveland on Thursday night — actually, there were several moments, but this one in particular lingered, and lingers, as an illuminating episode. You’ll never guess who was in the middle of it: starts with T and ends with “rump.”It occurred offstage, about a half-hour after the Rumble in the Rust Belt ended. The various campaign operatives, surrogates and hangers-on had repaired to the spin room — that designated nonsense preserve adjacent to the debate hall where propaganda is parceled and selfies with celeb reporters on TV get snapped (“Hey, you’re Carl Cameron of Fox!”).Spin rooms are stupid, crowded and almost never worth showing up to as a journalist except out of some collective sense of obligation, inertia, fatigue and self-loathing — all of which are in ample supply at the political-media nexus. Candidates themselves rarely show up in spin rooms, unless they really need the attention or have a particular mess to clean up — as Rick Perry did after his infamous “oops” debate in 2012, when he tried, with little success, to self-deprecate away the self-defecation he had just performed on stage.Yet the institution has persisted at debates well beyond its usefulness, if the spin room was ever useful to begin with (debatable). Little of consequence ever happens. Last night seemed no different until some commotion started erupting in a corner. The rumble seemed to be approaching a stampede for a few seconds: A crush of people was moving to a not-immediately-visible focal point. Imagine a version of Pamplona where the frantic mass is actually pursuing the bull rather than fleeing it.The bull was Trump, of course. In the flesh and hair, himself, in the spin room: It was as if being deprived of media attention in the brief interlude between the end of the debate and his morning interviews would suffocate him, as if he could not survive without this fix of TV lights before a few airless hours.People kept shoving, yelling at each other (“Back off, back off, give him space”). A few fell down; a photographer was hurled into a boom mike.From across the room, where I was standing, there was a brief sense that, whoa, maybe the normal order would not hold. Could we actually see multiple injuries in a spin-room stampede? This had never happened before, to my knowledge.But Trump had never happened before, at least in this great democracy pageant of ours. Would this be another moment when the whole thing — the traditional campaigns and the rules as we’ve known them — might go off the rails in a weird and huge and scary way?This instance did conjure a kind of professional-wrestling pandemonium. I’m not the first to make this analogy with regard to this Republican primary. But you wondered if this was for real and what could happen next. It was scary and extreme and thrilling, too. It was the chaos of Trump in a nutshell. If only Rowdy Roddy Piper, who died last month, had been alive to witness it.I didn’t get close enough to the action to hear what Trump was actually saying. He apparently had talked about how much he enjoyed himself at the debate, even though he thought the questions he was asked were harder than everyone else’s and that the Fox News moderator Megyn Kelly had “behaved very badly, personally.” Kelly had, among other things, questioned Trump about having called women “fat pigs, dogs, slobs and disgusting animals.”“Only Rosie O’Donnell,” Trump attempted to clarify (whoa).There were big laughs, unless they were gasps. This was not your father’s debate, or grandmother’s or Romney’s.One of the fascinating things about Thursday night was that no one seemed certain about how Trump actually did in the debate and what it would mean for him. There seemed to be a consensus that some candidates performed well (Marco Rubio, John Kasich and Carly Fiorina, in the early round) and that no one hurt himself too badly. But it was all over the map with Trump. Either he dominated the proceeding and solidified his position as the supercoiffed gorilla in the field or this was the beginning of the end for him, being called out as he was by Kelly (just as it was supposed to be the beginning of the end after he denigrated Mexican immigrants and John McCain’s war record, except that he only kept surging in polls).Another riveting aspect: No one has any idea where this will end up and what the new rules will be if the dust ever settles. At the very least, hopefully no one will get hurt, except perhaps America.As midnight approached in the spin room, someone with a camera in the back of the Trump scrum crashed to the ground. There was more shouting, and it seemed that someone made the executive decision to end this thing before paramedics intervened. The mass moved out and was gone as quickly as it had materialized. Trump, who now had his oxygen, departed the scene and tweeted through the night.