VIENNA — Russia will boycott a meeting of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe because of Ukraine-related sanctions that bar a prominent Russian lawmaker from attending, diplomats said on Thursday.The meeting, which is scheduled to begin in Helsinki, Finland, on Sunday, will bring together parliamentarians from the 57-nation organization.The Russian delegation was to have included Sergei Y. Naryshkin, the speaker of Russia’s lower house of Parliament, but Finland ruled that Mr. Naryshkin and five other Russians could not participate because of the travel bans the European Union imposed after Russia’s intervention in Ukraine.Finland was not in a position to grant an exception to the European Union ban for members of the Russian delegation, Ilkka Kanerva, the Finnish president of the O.S.C.E. Parliamentary Assembly, wrote in a letter to the group on Wednesday.The sanctions are in place because of the “clear and gross violations of international norms,” including the Helsinki Final Act, by Russia, he added, referring to a landmark agreement on human rights and relations between states that are part of the organization.In Moscow, the Kremlin denounced the move as “disgraceful.” Mr. Naryshkin, who supported the annexation of Crimea by Russia, announced that Moscow would not send a delegation to the nearly weeklong session to protest a “violation of the principles of democracy.”He said that he planned to attend a later session of the group’s Parliamentary Assembly, which is to be held in Mongolia.Western officials said that Russia was trying to use the Helsinki meeting to weaken the European Union travel sanctions. There have been other cases in which Russia’s selection of parliamentary delegates has led to objections by the O.S.C.E.Russia tried to send Olga Kovitidi, who represents Crimea in Russia’s upper house of Parliament, to a Vienna meeting of the group’s Parliamentary Assembly in February. Ukraine objected, saying that her participation would be tantamount to recognizing Russia’s annexation of Crimea, and O.S.C.E. officials agreed.In announcing that Ms. Kovitidi could not attend, an O.S.C.E panel said that she had been described by the Russian government as “representing the so-called government of Crimea.”