Each week in Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books. This week, Siddhartha Deb and James Parker debate whether legitimate satire has to punch upward at its subject.By Siddhartha DebSatire, applied with a thick brush in our current environment, reaffirms attitudes and prejudices.In the aftermath of the horrifying attacks this January on the French weekly Charlie Hebdo, there was a moment when the Western world seemed full of people identifying with the magazine’s satirical tradition. “Je suis Charlie” became a trending tag on social media, a logo on television screens and on restaurant menus, and a sign carried by crowds of people in France, including political leaders. The slogan seemed to affirm and uphold the principles of free speech and the Enlightenment, of debate and of democracy. As PEN America put it when presenting an award to Charlie Hebdo, “It is the role of the satirists in any free society to challenge the powerful and the sacred, pushing boundaries in ways that make expression freer and more robust for us all.”Of course, there were some PEN America members who, while condemning the assault, disagreed with the giving of the award. (I was one of them.) In France itself, many months after the rallies, the historian and sociologist Emmanuel Todd argued in his book “Who Is Charlie?” that the gatherings represented not just those committed to free speech and debate but also an increasingly xenophobic French middle class predisposed to hating Muslims, people for whom the right to profane what is held sacred by minorities became one more way of expressing their sense of racial superiority.Whether one finds Todd and the dissenters of PEN America right or wrong will very likely depend on what one considers to be more significant as a moral principle — the upholding of the right to say what one pleases, even if offensive, or a sense of solidarity with those who do not seem to have the right to humanity, people marginalized many times over by the state, a majoritarian population and the organs of expression of a free society. Those are the lines of the debate as we stand now.This was not always the case. Jonathan Swift’s 1729 pamphlet “A Modest Proposal,” considered canonical in the tradition of Western satire, describes in garish detail the ways in which poor Irish Catholic children can be eaten by their Protestant landlords — good for “two dishes at an entertainment for friends” but “the fore or hind quarter” enough for a family dining by itself. Yet Swift’s satirical drive is based upon his sense of solidarity with his subjects, those apparently being derided, and also upon the set of moral values he holds in common with his audience. Swift’s Protestant readers might start off by dismissing the Irish Catholic poor, as they encounter a description not too different from the rhetoric used by contemporary conservatives — the streets crowded with beggars, mothers who have too many children, children who turn to crime — but they are expected to be horrified once they understand their complicity with the brutal immiseration of an entire population, their exploitation on par, really, with cannibalism.Swift could hope to achieve such a transformation because his 18th-century readers shared his basic cultural codes, ones that involved argument and appeals to experts, the language of bookkeeping as well as that of Christianity. That sense of a common culture, however, is exactly what we can no longer lay claim to. Between Swift and his readers, and between Swift and his subjects today, lie the shifting sands of globalization — the colliding together of transnational capital and migrant labor, the rapidity of social media, the primacy of the image and the splintering of groups into micro-­communities.Satire, applied with a thick brush in such an environment, can work only to reaffirm attitudes and prejudices, unlikely to persuade anyone of anything beyond what they already believe in. Without principles beyond that of pushing the boundaries of what one has the right to say — and without empathy and engagement with the diversity of the world in which we live — all satire can reliably do is add to a sense of outrage, the one universal quality we still have in common.Siddhartha Deb was born in northeastern India. He is the author of two novels and “The Beautiful and the Damned,” a work of narrative nonfiction that was a finalist for the Orwell Prize and the winner of the PEN Open award. He is the recipient of grants and fellowships from the Society of Authors in the UK, the Nation Institute, the Radcliffe Institute of Advanced Studies at Harvard University, and the Howard Foundation at Brown University. His journalism, essays, and reviews have appeared in many publications, including The Guardian, The New York Times, The New Republic, The Baffler, The Nation, n+1, and The Times Literary Supplement.◆ ◆ ◆By James ParkerLeave the Donald’s hair alone. Going for the hair may not bother him (who knows?), but it’s no good for you — or your satire.Legitimate satire: sort of an oxymoron, isn’t it? Cross the boundary into satire — which is to say, into overkill, topsy-turviness, the explosion of premises — and it’s all up for grabs. No one’s legislating anything. Right? Humor is free, daddy-o! Death to the rules!That was my first thought, anyway. But then I had a cup of tea, and took the dog for a walk, and in due course this thought was succeeded by other, slightly more grown-up thoughts. Satire, after all, is a moral business deep down: It punctures delusions, it lays bare iniquities. It sizzles away your mental scaffolding or it blows up some foible to the size of the Death Star, so everyone can see it. The god of satire is . . . God, basically: the transcendent reference point, the beyond-this-world horizon of justice in whose hard light falsehood is shriveled away. So it follows that satire, to do its moral work, must itself be more or less moral. And the law is this: Broadly speaking, if it strikes upward, outward or inward, it’s satire, if it strikes downward, it’s bullying.Example: Donald Trump’s hair. By all means, lampoon or deconstruct Trump’s opinions — which I don’t believe are ­really opinions at all, but random clots and thrombi of rhetorical ectoplasm gathered from the ether with high-end paranormal pooper-scoopers. Yes, make hay with his inconsistencies, stick your satirical probes in the kinks of his fascinating and possibly apocalyptic personality. But leave his hair alone. His hair is in the strictest sense powerless. It’s doing its best — as hair, as a hairstyle. It lies there and tries and makes no reply. It’s quite a nice color. I once described (in print) an actor in a “Harry Potter” movie as “sturgeon-lipped.” Why did I do that? Seeking the cheap high of invective, nothing more. Lay off that stuff, is my advice. Leave the Donald’s hair alone. Going for the hair may not bother him (who knows?), but it’s no good for you — or your satire.“The Daily Show.” That’s satire. But so is “Waiting for Godot”: a satire of the human condition. And “the human condition” is a cliché, which gives us some idea of how trapped we are in it, and how badly we need “Waiting for Godot.” (At the exact midpoint between “The Daily Show” and “Waiting for Godot,” meanwhile — that’s where I’d put “Slaughterhouse-Five.”) Metaphysical satire goes straight at the powers that be, because what could be more oppressively and pervasively powerful than the terms of existence — the Way It Is? Good stand-up comedy disrupts the herd thinking, the herd mood, stand-ups being, in the main, cracked romantics and disappointed lovers of mankind. Life for the stand-up is a high truth degraded, and he avenges it with gags and horrible insights that make you go hur-hur-hur. “You know when you’re at the bank,” Louis C.K. says, “and you’ve got nothing to do while you’re waiting in line so you just pick people to hate. . . . ‘Uughh, look at his shoes. . . . I hope he dies today, oh God I hate him. . . .’ He’s just standing there, he has no idea you’re just boiling with hate.” We all know what he’s talking about, that seething, chattering layer of antipathy — road rage for pedestrians. It possesses us. It charms us, even. It has power over us. It can, thank God, be satirized.Power cannot satirize: It has too much to lose. When it comes to satire, power is mute. “All over the world,” an Israeli man who lives on my street was telling me last week, “the quiet people are being pushed out by the vicious.” I prompted him: “So the meek shall inherit . . .?” “The ice,” he replied. “The desert. The side of the mountain.” And where the meek go, where the weak go, they take the satire with them.James Parker is a contributing editor at The Atlantic and has written for Slate, The Boston Globe and Arthur magazine. He was a staff writer at The Boston Phoenix and in 2008 won a Deems Taylor Award for music criticism from the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers.