WASHINGTON —  President Obama said on Sunday that he was “heartbroken” at the death of a technology policy adviser, Jake Brewer, who was killed in a cycling accident on Saturday while participating in a charity ride to raise money for cancer research.Mr. Brewer, 34, who worked in the office of the chief technology officer at the White House, was taking part in the Ride to Conquer Cancer rally and fund-raiser when he entered a sharp curve on a road in a wooded section of Mount Airy, Md., the Howard County police said. He lost control of his bicycle, crossed the yellow lines and was struck by an oncoming sport utility vehicle, the police said. He was pronounced dead at the scene.Mr. Brewer was the husband of Mary Katharine Ham, a journalist, and the father of a young daughter, with another child on the way. Mr. Brewer had only recently begun work at the White House. Since June, he had led initiatives to expand access to job opportunities in the technology sector and widen the availability of broadband connectivity.“Armed with a brilliant mind, a big heart and an insatiable desire to give back, Jake devoted his life to empowering people and making government work better for them,” Mr. Obama said. “He worked to give citizens a louder voice in our society. He engaged our striving immigrants. He pushed for more transparency in our democracy. And he sought to expand opportunity for all.”Megan Smith, Mr. Obama’s chief technology adviser, said Mr. Brewer “had a generous heart and a vision for engaging with technology, data and most importantly each other to create opportunity and find solutions together.”Mr. Brewer, a competitive triathlete who rode on Saturday in honor of a friend who had been stricken with cancer, previously led global policy and external affairs at Change.org, the online petition website. He had also worked on a number of initiatives that sought to use technology to solve societal problems.“We lost our Jake yesterday, and I lost part of my heart and the father of my sweet babies,” Ms. Ham wrote in an Instagram post on Sunday. “In a life where nothing is guaranteed, Jake made the absolute, ever-lovin’ most of his time with all of us.”