Thomas Jefferson designed his beloved Monticello (“little mountain” in Italian) as an expression of his political and aesthetic values. And yet, 50 years after Jefferson died in 1826, his shrine to American democracy in Charlottesville, Va., was enmeshed in weeds, with the main house in danger of collapse.Monticello’s decline could be traced back to Jefferson’s propensity to play fast and loose with his personal finances. He departed this earth at the age of 83 with debts of $107,723 (more than $2.5 million today). Slaves he had kept were auctioned the following year. His daughter, Martha, who became a widow in 1828, could not afford to stay in the house along with her children, and the estate was put up for sale in 1831. (Martha did retain ownership of the graveyard where Jefferson is buried.)Monticello’s uncertain fate after Jefferson’s death illustrates some of the dangers of leaving a national treasure to the vagaries of the private real estate marketplace.Jefferson’s heirs had hoped they could auction Monticello for $20,000 (about $477,000 today). But the site was hilly and remote, and such iconoclastic Jeffersonian details as narrow staircases and ill-defined bedrooms struck some well-heeled Virginia couples as the enemy of gracious living.The estate, reduced by land sales from about 5,000 acres to 522, sold in August 1831 for $7,000 to James Turner Barclay, an eccentric local druggist whom Martha Jefferson Randolph considered to be a madman. He grew experimental silkworms on the property before becoming a missionary and decamping for the Holy Land.In 1834, Barclay sold Monticello to Uriah Phillips Levy, who braved anti-Semitism in the United States Navy to become the first Jewish commodore, and also helped persuade Congress to end the naval practice of flogging. Levy admired Jefferson as “an absolute democrat” who had helped to mold a republic in which “a man’s religion does not make him ineligible for political or government life.” He was imprisoned after his United States brig was captured by the British during the War of 1812, and he amassed a fortune in New York real estate.When Levy died in 1862, he willed Monticello to the federal government as a school for Navy orphans, but in the heat of the Civil War, Jefferson Davis’s Confederacy seized and used it as a convalescent home for wounded rebel soldiers. Thanks to souvenir-seekers and vandals, the estate soon became, as one visitor recalled, “an absolute ruin,” with caretakers herding cattle during the winter into Jefferson’s old basement.The commodore’s nephew, Jefferson Monroe Levy, bought out his feuding relatives in 1879 for $10,050 (about $239,000 now), vowing to restore Monticello “to the original plans and style.” Within a decade, a visiting reporter found it “as sound and substantial a country mansion as it ever was.” In 1897, William Jennings Bryan, just after his first defeat for president by William McKinley, wrote Levy a public letter proposing that Monticello be purchased by the federal government. Levy replied that no amount of money could induce him to sell.In 1912, while leading a national drive for public ownership of Monticello using petitions and mass mailings, Maud Wilson Littleton, the Texas-born wife of a Democratic congressman from Brooklyn, published a needling account of having dined at Monticello. She wrote: “One could hear and see only the Levys and the Levy family, their deeds of valor, their accomplishments, their lives. I wished I could get them out of my mind, but when I left Monticello, Thomas Jefferson was but a disappearing memory, run out into and mixed up with the Levys.”Marc Leepson wrote in his 2001 book, “Saving Monticello,” that there was a “strong anti-Semitic subtext in Mrs. Littleton’s campaign,” with its “themes of greed, selfishness and lack of patriotism.” She was not fazed by the fact that by then, Jefferson Levy had won a congressional seat from New York City as a Democrat and was serving alongside her husband, Martin.In December 1912, the House narrowly rejected a bill, fiercely opposed by Levy, to explore Monticello’s acquisition by the federal government. But in 1914, Levy showed interest in a new proposal by Bryan, who was serving as Woodrow Wilson’s secretary of state, to make the estate a retreat for sitting presidents. Levy named a price of $500,000, which he said was less than half what Monticello was worth after his decades of improvements.Monticello never became a Camp David, but Levy finally relaxed his opposition to the notion of the old house as a public museum. By 1923, money was raised through national subscriptions to compensate the 71-year-old Levy for Monticello. He died the following year.Other historical sites have endured their traumas. George Washington’s Virginia estate nearly succumbed to neglect before it was saved in 1858 by the Mount Vernon Ladies’ Association. Abraham Lincoln’s fabled Kentucky birth cabin was destroyed; his family homestead in Springfield, Ill., was occupied, in the late 19th century, by a tenant who displayed a John Wilkes Booth portrait above the fireplace.But like Mount Vernon and Lincoln’s Illinois house, Monticello (which now appears on one side of the five-cent coin) enjoyed a happy ending. Under the Thomas Jefferson Foundation (of which — full disclosure — I am a former trustee), the house and grounds, now open to the public, have been restored with newly built facilities for research and education.And in 1985, a ceremony was held at Monticello to honor the Levy family’s “good stewardship,” which, as Edgar M. Bronfman of the World Jewish Congress declared that day, had helped the estate to be “rescued from destruction.”