You’ve been hosting ‘‘America’s Next Top Model’’ for more than a decade. It gives you a unique vantage point on how reality television has influenced the people who consume it. How are the young people who audition for the show today different from those of 10 years ago? In terms of the audition process, people sometimes come in and are like, ‘‘I’m gonna be the weird one!’’ or ‘‘I’m gonna be the overly sexual one!’’ They’ve grown up with reality television and know that producers are looking for strong archetypes. I’d like to think that we can see through that.Many models now come up through Instagram. Has social media influenced them as well? One of my models this cycle doesn’t even know what Vogue is. I was like, ‘‘How do you know how to pose like this?’’ And she’s like: ‘‘I don’t knooooww. I’m on social media and I, like, put the timer on my cameerraaa? And I just kinda pose?’’I read that in the beginning of the show, you intentionally avoided having audiences vote because you thought they would favor more typical model types, and you wanted to show a more diverse range of beauty. Now, in the current season of ‘‘A.N.T.M.,’’ the television and social media audiences do get to vote, right? No, we have stopped the audience voting.Is it because of that concern? Yes. Some of us understand that quirky is cool, that freckles are cool, that a gap is cool in teeth, that eyes that are far apart are cool or a big forehead is cool. But the majority of the population doesn’t.How far do you think you can push the boundaries of what a model is? Only so far. Even on ‘‘A.N.T.M.’’ we push it in a way that, sometimes, the girl gets into the real world of modeling and can’t find work.You now have men on ‘‘A.N.T.M.’’ Would you consider a plus-size or otherwise nontraditionally beautiful male model? I’ve never seen that in real life. I know it’s harder for guys. For girls, we have plus-size models. Guys kind of have to have six-pack abs or be thin.You could be the first. Yeah, I just want to make sure he has a job when he leaves.One striking element of the accusations surrounding Bill Cosby is that he is said to have told a modeling agency owner that he was looking for broke, out-of-town models, basically targeting the most vulnerable people he could find. Have you ever heard of anyone ever doing anything like that? I can’t comment on him specifically, but no, I haven’t heard of people doing that. Still, there’s always people who want to date models and be attached to models. When I was first in New York, I lived in a models’ apartment, and one day I answered the phone, and these guys were like, ‘‘Hey, wanna go out, you wanna party?’’ And I was like, ‘‘Who is this?’’ It turned out these guys had the number to the apartment, and they would just call models to go party.You interviewed Hillary Clinton on your talk show. What was she like? I actually like Hillary personally. She was just so free-flowing.Really? The standard media take on her is that she is cold and that she’s calculating and that she doesn’t loosen up. Oh, my God, she was so relaxed and so cool. We talked about cellulite and she was like: ‘‘Yeah, I’ve got cellulite, and I look in the mirror, and I don’t have any clothes on, and I don’t like everything I see.’’ It was that kind of conversation.Do you think she’s a victim of sexism in the media? Oh, come on. We know that. You’re just getting me to say it so you can type it up.If you hadn’t been born so beautiful and couldn’t be a model, what do you think you’d be doing? I probably would have made a hell of a lot more money by now. Because I have a personal brand, I have to worry about all this personal-image crap. I am constantly saying no to things because of it. If I didn’t, child, I think I’d be in the billionaires’ club.