The administration of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo agreed on Friday to suspend a plan to require background checks on ammunition sales, putting in doubt part of the gun control law that he considers one of his proudest legacies.The decision, which the administration did not publicize, was the result of an unusual deal the governor’s office reached with the State Senate’s Republican majority. The Senate’s Democratic minority and the speaker of the State Assembly condemned the move.The background-check system was approved as part of the Safe Act, the set of tough gun control measures that Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, persuaded lawmakers to pass in January 2013, shortly after the mass school shooting in Newtown, Conn.The act was a signature accomplishment of the governor’s first term, and one that he has frequently spoken of with pride, making the move on Friday particularly surprising.“Just controlling guns isn’t enough,” Mr. Cuomo said in a speech in 2013, while discussing the ammunition background checks.In addition to the ammunition measure, the Safe Act also included provisions to expand bans on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines and to keep guns out of the hands of people with mental illnesses.The background checks on ammunition sales had not yet been put in place. Mr. Cuomo said in March that a database designed to make the checks possible was still being developed, though his administration offered few details about the delay.On Friday, a top aide to Mr. Cuomo signed a memorandum of understanding suspending the portion of the Safe Act related to the background checks. The memorandum, citing “the lack of adequate technology,” said the database “cannot be established and/or function in the manner originally intended at this time.”The document was signed by the governor’s director of state operations, Jim Malatras, and the Senate majority leader, John J. Flanagan of Long Island. “This is a clear victory for Second Amendment rights in New York,” said Senator James L. Seward, a Republican from Otsego County, who was one of a number of Republican senators who publicized the agreement.James J. Baker, an official with the lobbying arm of the National Rifle Association, called the memorandum “a step in the right direction to restore a degree of sanity after the Safe Act’s over-the-top demonization of lawful New York gun owners.”Democrats in the Legislature criticized the agreement. The Assembly speaker, Carl E. Heastie, a Bronx Democrat, said it was “an ill-advised end run around the Legislature and the Safe Act.”“I did not participate in this ‘agreement’,” he said. “The law may not be ‘suspended’ by a memorandum such as this. I believe the law should be followed and implemented as intended.” A spokesman for the Senate Democrats, Mike Murphy, called the agreement “outrageous.”“On first read, this appears blatantly unconstitutional,” said Senator Michael N. Gianaris of Queens, the deputy minority leader. “The notion that one house of the Legislature will have greater powers than another, and the governor, with one house only, can agree to change state law, turns our democracy on its head.”Mr. Cuomo’s office sought to downplay the significance of the agreement. Alphonso B. David, the governor’s counsel, said that all portions of the Safe Act remained in effect.The memorandum, he said, “has no power or effect on the law,” but “provides assurances to all that the database will not be implemented until it is ready and tested.”