A growing number of Iranian human rights activists and artists, including a Nobel laureate and people who have spent time in prison for their views, are asking Americans in a social media campaign to support the nuclear deal with Iran.Their messages, uploaded to YouTube and Facebook over the past few days, are a new element in the emotional arguments for and against the nuclear agreement that are underway in the United States ahead of a mid-September vote in Congress.“For Iranians, it’s quite clear that almost all major human rights activists and pro-democracy activists are supporting this deal,” said Mohammadreza Jalaeipour, a former political prisoner and organizer of the opposition Green movement, the target of a crackdown after the disputed 2009 elections in Iran.Mr. Jalaeipour, who helped coordinate the production of the videos, said in a telephone interview on Tuesday that he had posted a call for 30-second videos in support of the nuclear agreement and made one of himself.Forty human rights advocates and artists have appeared in their own video messages or are preparing them, Mr. Jalaeipour said. They speak in English or in Persian with English subtitles.The campaign is partly a response to a video message uploaded this month and broadcast on American television by Citizens for a Nuclear Free Iran, a pro-Israel organization in the United States. In that message, Ahmad Batebi, a dissident journalist and rights advocate who fled Iran for the United States seven years ago, says Iran cannot be trusted to abide by the agreement and urges Congress to oppose it.“Opponents of the deal are using the key words ‘democracy’ and ‘human rights’ a lot,” Mr. Jalaeipour said, “and we wanted to raise our voices and show the American audience that we are pro-democracy activists.”Their messages of support have not been reported in Iran’s state-run news media, Mr. Jalaeipour and others said, but there has been no effort to stifle them.Some of Iran’s best-known human rights defenders have participated, including Nasrin Sotoudeh, a lawyer who spent years in prison for her activism; Shirin Ebadi, a lawyer who won the 2003 Nobel Peace Prize; and Ghoncheh Ghavami, who challenged the Iranian government’s rule preventing women from attending men’s volleyball games.One contribution is an audio message on Facebook from Zia Nabavi, a political prisoner serving a 10-year sentence, who expressed support for the deal from his prison cell.Other participants include celebrities from Iranian cinema, like Jafar Panahi, a director, and Reza Kianian, an actor. Also involved is Mohammad Taghi Karroubi, the son of Mehdi Karroubi, a leader of the Green movement who has been under house arrest for years.The Obama administration is close to securing enough votes in Congress to ensure the approval of the nuclear agreement. But with Republicans strongly opposed and a number of Democrats still undecided, uncertainty over its fate has not abated.The accord, reached between Iran and six world powers last month, will lift most economic sanctions on Iran in exchange for verifiable guarantees that its nuclear activities remain peaceful.Opponents — most notably Israel’s government, which says that Iran poses an existential threat to Israel — have described the agreement as a blueprint for Iran to create nuclear weapons in the future. Supporters of the accord include a range of arms control experts, diplomats and nuclear scientists.Mr. Jalaeipour said the motivation to create supportive messages had intensified after Citizens for a Nuclear Free Iran — created by the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, one of the most influential lobbying organizations in Washington — began a national ad campaign featuring Mr. Batebi, who fled to the United States in 2008.In that ad, Mr. Batebi describes being tortured in prison even though Iran had signed a treaty banning torture. “Now they’ve signed a deal promising no nuclear weapons, but they keep their nuclear facilities and ballistic missiles,” he says. “What do you think they’ll be doing?”