ADDIS ABABA, Ethiopia — Ethiopia’s ruling coalition appears headed for a sweeping victory following Sunday’s national elections, according to provisional results announced Wednesday.A preliminary tally from Ethiopia’s electoral board found that of 442 constituencies counted so far, all have been won by the ruling coalition or its regional allies. The count included the capital, Addis Ababa, where all 23 parliamentary seats went to the incumbent Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front.Merga Bekana, the electoral board chairman, said citizens had “really committed themselves to the development of democracy” on Sunday, with a turnout exceeding 90 percent of registered voters.The Parliament covers 547 constituencies in total, and the last national elections in 2010 delivered all but two seats to the ruling party. Opposition parties and some voters said the ruling party’s tight control over Ethiopia, Africa’s most populous country after Nigeria, led to human rights abuses against opposition supporters, leaving no room for critical voices.The ruling party has been in control since overthrowing a military regime in 1991, and campaigned partly on a strong development record. Over the past decade, Ethiopia has achieved high economic growth rates, widespread poverty reduction, and intensive infrastructure development.Farmers like Beyene Gedefa, 38, are the backbone of the ruling party’s electoral success, attributable in part to the benefits they receive from the government. “I voted for the ruling party,” he said. “They bring us fertilizer, and they bring it on time.”In one rural constituency in central Oromia region, members of Medrek, a major opposition coalition, complained that their own poll observers had been dismissed from their stations by electoral board officials. Medrek member Moti Iticha, 18, said he left his assigned station before noon on Election Day after pointing out several inconsistencies, including officials accompanying voters into private booths. “I asked them to solve these problems, but no one listened, so I left,” he said.Electoral board officials at the station denied allegations that voter privacy had been violated, but several villagers said they had faced pressure to vote for the ruling party. “At first I was going to mark next to the five fingers,” said Workitu Daba, a 40-year-old farmer, referring to the symbol associated with Medrek. “There was someone in the booth with me and they said, ‘No, mark here!’ So I changed it,” she said.Other voters said the elections were free and fair. “I got information about the parties on TV and on the radio,” Khalid Mohamed, 20, a university student in the city of Ambo. “The whole process was democratic.”Should the preliminary results be confirmed when the final outcome is reported next month, Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn will retain his post at least until the ruling party holds its congress later this year, according to Communications Minister Redwan Hussien. “Regarding the policy, I don’t think there will be much variance,” he added. “We are going to keep on marching forward with the direction that we have.”