The recent federal trials that ended in the quick convictions of Sheldon Silver and Dean G. Skelos laid bare a world of greed, flagrant corruption and abuse of power in Albany, with evidence showing payoffs taking a deceptively circular route from business interests to the elected officials whose help they sought.But one man who was a key player in both cases — and identified by the government as a co-conspirator at the trial of Mr. Skelos, the former Republican majority leader of the State Senate, and his son, Adam — never appeared in the courtroom.That man was Leonard Litwin, the 101-year-old owner of Glenwood Management, an influential developer of luxury high-rise apartment buildings in Manhattan that is among the state’s most prodigious political donors. Prosecutors named Mr. Litwin as a co-conspirator during a sidebar conference with the judge and defense lawyers that went largely unnoticed.In addition to its role at the heart of the government’s case against the Skeloses, both of whom were convicted of bribery, extortion and conspiracy this month, Glenwood also figured prominently in the federal corruption trial of Sheldon Silver, the Democratic assemblyman and former speaker who was convicted of extortion, wire fraud and money laundering 11 days earlier.The name of Mr. Litwin was just one example of the way the two corruption trials revealed how entwined the interests of Glenwood and other developers are with the business of the state. Testimony, documents, emails and other evidence provided the most detailed look to date at the ways in which Glenwood and others deftly worked the levers of power to marshal tens of millions of dollars in campaign contributions through a maze of limited liability companies, trade associations and political groups, with Senator Skelos himself soliciting and directing the money at times.Glenwood’s entanglement in the Skelos case was so pronounced that a senior executive with the company, Charles C. Dorego, testified under a non-prosecution agreement. Testimony and company records presented at trial showed Glenwood had sought and received favored treatment in Albany by spending more than $10 million on campaign donations since 2005 alone.Few pockets were spared: Glenwood’s largess was documented in a 54-page printout admitted as evidence that covered the developer’s political contributions over the last 10 years, funneled through 26 different limited liability companies.The money, according to Mr. Dorego, Glenwood’s senior vice president and general counsel, was used to ensure the developer would continue to benefit from tax breaks, government financing and favorable rent laws. One program alone saved them as much as $100 million, he said.Taken together, the two trials also brought into sharp relief a view of the broader Albany landscape, where critics say a thin veil of representative democracy had obscured the unchallenged exercise of power by the state capital’s ruling triumvirate: Mr. Skelos and Mr. Silver, until their arrests earlier this year, and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat.Coming close on the heels of Mr. Silver’s conviction, the guilty verdicts against Senator Skelos, 67, and Adam B. Skelos, 33, ended the careers of two of those entrenched leaders. The jury in the Skelos case found that the two men had used the senator’s position to pressure an environmental technology company, a medical malpractice insurer and Glenwood into providing benefits worth $300,000 to his son.In the case against Mr. Silver, 71, one scheme involved his role in pushing Glenwood and a second developer to use a particular law firm for certain tax business; that firm shared hundreds of thousands of dollars in fees with Mr. Silver. In exchange, he supported legislation critical to Glenwood.By naming Mr. Litwin as a co-conspirator, prosecutors were able to elicit testimony from Mr. Dorego in which he described conversations with Mr. Litwin, and for the jury to consider those conversations as evidence and not hearsay, which is inadmissible. The government often names co-conspirators in complex cases whom they believe have aided defendants but whom, for various reasons, it has chosen not to prosecute. In addition to not testifying, Mr. Litwin was not charged.Both the Skelos and Silver trials underscored Glenwood’s philosophy that its generous political support was a minor cost of doing business. Mr. Dorego told the jury the company reaped an estimated $50 million to $100 million in savings over an unspecified period from one state program alone, a real estate tax-abatement law called 421-a. The State Legislature must renew the law periodically through a process essentially controlled by the two legislative leaders and the governor.Mr. Dorego testified that the law’s continued renewal was an “absolute necessity” for Glenwood. Without it, he said, the cost of city real estate taxes — the largest component of a luxury high-rise’s operating budget — would make building such towers unfeasible, in part because lenders would not finance them.For that reason, Mr. Dorego told the jury, keeping the State Senate in the control of Republicans — who, in his words, “were more business-oriented and had more of an interest in making sure business thrived in the city” — was “the No. 1 priority” for Glenwood’s political strategy and “Mr. Litwin’s No. 1 concern.”Glenwood also benefited from another state-administered program, using it to obtain more than $1 billion in low-interest, tax-exempt bond financing since 2000, to buy land and construct eight buildings it has put up since 2001, according to testimony at Mr. Silver’s trial. Each application to the program, under which a developer must set aside 20 percent of a new building’s units for low-income housing, must be approved by an obscure state agency, the Public Authorities Control Board.The three-member board is made up of the governor and the two legislative leaders, or their designees. All applications require unanimous approval, giving each member a potential veto as well as, prosecutors suggested, power and leverage.Glenwood also depended on the governor and the legislative leaders to renew favorable rent regulations that determine when a developer or landlord can shift rent-stabilized apartments to market-rate rentals.A lawyer for Glenwood, Alan Levine of Cooley LLP, declined to comment about the disclosures about the company at the Skelos trial. Mr. Dorego’s lawyer, Kevin M. Downey, did not return a call seeking comment.The 54-page printout, generated by Glenwood’s accounting department, showed that the company spent across party lines, although its contributions tilted toward Republicans. During the 10 years in question, nearly $1.3 million went to the New York State Senate Republican Campaign Committee, which Mr. Skelos controlled beginning in 2008.The biggest beneficiary of Glenwood’s giving: Mr. Cuomo, who, in the last election cycle, received more than $1 million from limited liability companies, or L.L.C.s, connected to the company.Glenwood-controlled L.L.Cs also gave Senator Skelos’s campaign committee more than $100,000 over the years, as well as donating $10,000 to the 2012 re-election campaign of his brother, Peter Skelos, a State Supreme Court justice in Nassau County at the time. Another $200,000 went to a legal-defense fund for Joseph L. Bruno, a former State Senate majority leader whose 2009 federal corruption conviction was overturned; he was subsequently acquitted at a second trial.The company’s money also flowed to Republicans through other channels. In 2013 and 2014, more than $500,000 went to Jobs For New York, a group that separately spent about $1.9 million on Republican campaigns last year. Jobs for New York is run by the Real Estate Board of New York; that organization received more than $150,000 from Glenwood-tied L.L.C.s over the 10 years covered in the printout. (Mr. Litwin and Mr. Dorego have sat on the real estate board’s executive board.)During that decade, about $700,000 went to the Neighborhood Preservation Political Action Fund, a group linked to the city’s largest landlord group, the Rent Stabilization Association.When it came to the governor, Glenwood was considered such a reliable contributor that his fund-raisers suggested to the developer that it spread what would become a multiyear million-dollar donation “into biannual installments,” according to documents uncovered by investigators from the Moreland Commission, an anticorruption panel that Mr. Cuomo created in 2013, but abruptly disbanded nine months later.Glenwood also funneled money to Mr. Cuomo indirectly: On a single day in 2011, 10 of the company’s L.L.C.s combined to give a total of $500,000 to the Committee to Save New York, a group of business interests that spent $16 million to support Mr. Cuomo’s agenda during his first two years in office.Emails entered into evidence at the Skeloses’ trial provided powerful context for the purpose of Glenwood’s spending.In one email, Glenwood’s chief political strategist, Richard Runes, who testified at Mr. Silver’s trial, wrote to a lobbyist for Glenwood, “Please send me the list of senators Dean asked us yesterday to help before the next filing date.” The lobbyist wrote back with the names of seven candidates and the amounts to be donated, totaling $92,300. The names were forwarded to Mr. Dorego a week later, under the subject line “List from Skelos”; the donations were made.Several weeks earlier, Mr. Runes had written to Mr. Dorego with a similar request, seeking $100,000 for the New York State Senate Republican Campaign Committee, $30,000 for Mr. Skelos’s campaign committee and more than $50,000 divided among five other candidates. A copy of a printout of the email listed the individual L.L.C.s that ultimately made the donations.The contributions seemed to pay dividends for Glenwood and the real estate industry as a whole in the form of a seat at the table — sometimes quite literally.With a law that governed rent regulations set to expire in 2011, Mr. Dorego testified that he and other real estate executives were called to two meetings with state leaders in June, one at the governor’s office in New York City and one at his office in Albany.At the meeting in Albany, Mr. Dorego testified, he and other executives met with Mr. Cuomo in the governor’s office. And then they were summoned by Mr. Skelos, who sought to reassure them. Everything, Mr. Skelos said, “seemed to be falling in line.”