Mayor Bill de Blasio is showcasing New York’s financial wherewithal, and its civic leaders, in the final stages of the city’s competition with Philadelphia and Columbus, Ohio, to host the Democratic National Convention in 2016.The mayor will announce on Thursday that the city’s host committee has $6.5 million in cash on hand against $20 million in pledges, officials said, and that the group now has a membership of 117 familiar names from the corporate, labor and political realms.The leaders of the group will include Anna Wintour, the editor of Vogue; Kenneth I. Chenault, chief executive of American Express; George Gresham, president of 1199 S.E.I.U. United Healthcare Workers East; the technology entrepreneur Sean Parker; and Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, officials said.Notably, New York has less cash on hand than Philadelphia, though it holds an edge in fund-raising commitments. There is, however, no dispute that New York would ultimately be able to raise more money than either of its rivals.“One of the keys to the convention’s success will be raising all the money required to put on a world-class event,” said Laura Santucci, the mayor’s chief of staff, who is spearheading the city’s effort. “With a $100 million goal, $20 million in commitments and $6.5 million in the bank already, New York’s bid will be tough to match.”Mr. de Blasio’s announcement comes as Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz, chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, prepares to visit the city on Friday after stops in Columbus and Philadelphia earlier in the week.The Democratic National Committee is to choose a host city in February, after what has been a somewhat fevered, and sometimes playful, contest among the three cities.Each has argued that it would offer a unique backdrop for the convention: Philadelphia as the cradle of American democracy, Columbus as the capital of a swing state, and New York as a city with a Democratic mayor for the first time in two decades, in a state that was represented in the United States Senate not long ago by Hillary Rodham Clinton, a possible presidential nominee in 2016.New York last hosted a Democratic convention in 1992, when Mrs. Clinton’s husband, Bill Clinton, was the nominee. Mr. de Blasio, before seeking elected office himself, served as Mrs. Clinton’s campaign manager in her Senate campaign in 2000.In considering potential host cities, the Democratic Party’s planners have emphasized practicalities over optics and sentiment, pressing the contenders on lodging, transportation and the millions of dollars necessary to stage an event that is expected to attract some 35,000 participants. The party’s request for proposals requires the winning city to have $5 million in the bank when a contract is signed.New York, with its vast roster of billionaires and millionaires, many of them already prolific Democratic donors, has always held a financial advantage. Ms. Santucci said that the host committee had collected $1.5 million just since December — proof, she said, of the city’s ability to raise large sums of money quickly. New York organizers have boasted that the city could raise $100 million.But Edward G. Rendell, the former mayor of Philadelphia and governor of Pennsylvania, argued that money should be a threshold issue, not a decisive one. “The question is, can Philadelphia and Columbus raise enough money to hold a convention?” he said. “Philadelphia has proved that.”Mr. Rendell said Philadelphia had $8.6 million in cash on hand against pledges totaling at least $14 million.Officials in Columbus declined to disclose details of their fund-raising efforts, citing a confidentiality agreement with the Democratic National Committee. But Meredith Tucker, a spokeswoman for Columbus 2016, said the city was confident of its chances, and noted that Columbus had earned praise from the National Hockey League, whose All-Star Game was played there last weekend.“We are confident in our bid and ability to raise the necessary money to put on the best convention,” Ms. Tucker said. “Columbus will deliver on all of the promises we put forward.”