On a wintry Sunday in February, Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York huddled at Gracie Mansion with a trusted adviser, John Del Cecato, to polish his marquee speech of 2015, the annual State of the City address.In the days before the address, Mr. de Blasio and Mr. Del Cecato would spend hours together, meeting at City Hall and Gracie Mansion. Those sessions, according to the mayor’s schedules, were among roughly 60 they shared in the first 17 months of his administration.Mr. Del Cecato is not on Mr. de Blasio’s staff — at least not officially. He is one of several political consultants advising the Democratic mayor whose firms have been paid using money contributed by private donors.These consultants helped guide Mr. de Blasio’s campaign for mayor in 2013, and they have remained at his side as a kind of privately funded brain trust, offering strategic advice and helping to shape the message that comes from City Hall. Their involvement also poses conflict-of-interest concerns, as some of the consultants’ firms have clients that do business with the city.For their place in the mayor’s orbit, these consultants have been well compensated: In the first year and a half of his term, their firms have collected nearly $2.3 million in payments. Most of the money has come from a nonprofit organization, the Campaign for One New York, that was created by political professionals from his mayoral campaign as a vehicle to push his initiatives, and whose donors have included real estate developers and unions.Through the middle of this year, 77 percent of the group’s spending went to several consulting firms that also worked for Mr. de Blasio’s 2013 campaign.The mayor’s reliance on private consultants seems to run contrary to the image he has cultivated. As mayor, he has criticized the role that the “consultant class” played in politics; in his previous elective office, as the city’s public advocate, he assailed the influence of political donors hiding behind “political committees that masquerade as tax-exempt nonprofits.”Yet a review by The New York Times of hundreds of pages of the mayor’s daily schedules, as well as email correspondence and other records, shows the central role that private consultants have played in his administration. The correspondence highlights how some consultants have almost unfiltered access to City Hall, with the dialogue conveying a casual atmosphere.The communications strategy for the Campaign for One New York’s work to promote the mayor’s agenda has been overseen by BerlinRosen, a public affairs consulting firm known for its political work. It represents numerous clients that do business with the city, including real estate developers and nonprofit organizations. The firm had a central role in Mr. de Blasio’s successful bid for City Hall, and one of its principals, Jonathan Rosen, is a close friend and adviser.It is not unusual for elected officials to seek the counsel of outside advisers or friends as they formulate policy or navigate turbulent political waters. But Mr. de Blasio has given new dimension to that practice, meeting with some consultants more often than some senior members of his administration.Mr. de Blasio’s press secretary, Karen Hinton, said the mayor “obtains advice from a range of people representing community groups, the business sector and nonprofits.” Ms. Hinton said that most of his outside advisers were not paid and did not work on the mayor’s campaign, and that none of them lobbied City Hall.There is nothing that forbids the mayor from using private consultants, but government watchdog groups say the practice could create situations in which consultants wind up advising the mayor on important decisions, while, simultaneously, their firms are paid by clients that would be affected by those decisions.Some of the consultants’ firms have clients with a vested interest in decisions made at City Hall, including major developers as well as Airbnb and Lyft.“You cannot serve two masters,” said Susan Lerner, the executive director of Common Cause New York, who criticized the prominent place of consultants in Mr. de Blasio’s mayoralty.“The concern is he’s building a shadow government,” Ms. Lerner added, “and that leaves a lack of transparency and a lack of accountability.”Mr. Del Cecato — who is credited with developing the attention-grabbing television advertisement  during the 2013 mayoral race that featured Mr. de Blasio’s son, Dante — has regularly met with the mayor in planning meetings that also include other consultants and high-ranking City Hall officials, as well as in smaller gatherings. He declined to comment on his relationship with the mayor.Mr. Del Cecato is one of several major players from the 2013 campaign who have remained in Mr. de Blasio’s orbit. Others include Mr. Rosen and Nick Baldick, a top campaign adviser who is managing partner at another firm, Hilltop Public Solutions.Mr. de Blasio, a former campaign manager himself, has not always been an evangelist of political consultants. At an event this spring, discussing why other Democrats, in his view, had shied away from talking about issues like income inequality, he pointed to the advice they had received.“I think what we have developed in this country is a consultant class and an insider class,” he said, “that often is very unimaginative and not necessarily connected to the grass roots.”Unlimited DonationsAs public advocate, Mr. de Blasio condemned the growing role of “shadowy” nonprofit groups, calling them “a threat to our democracy.”But as mayor, Mr. de Blasio has embraced the Campaign for One New York, the nonprofit group that has provided steady income for several consulting firms he relies on.The campaign was started in December 2013, just after Mr. de Blasio was elected. Bill Hyers, who had been his campaign manager, serves as its chairman. The group has supported the mayor’s agenda, advocating, for instance, the expansion of prekindergarten that was the signature issue of the de Blasio campaign. It has also retained a lineup of consultants who are close to the mayor.Ms. Hinton said the nonprofit’s involvement did not contradict the mayor’s previous stances because of its mission, and because it disclosed its donors and expenses. She said the group “does not engage in politics” but “exists solely to advance the administration’s agenda,” and she called its creation “not unprecedented or unique or anything.”Mr. de Blasio has been active in helping to raise money for the Campaign for One New York, which can accept unlimited donations. By doing so, he has bypassed the city’s campaign finance laws that would ban or strictly limit certain contributions, including those from corporations and limited liability companies and from people who have business dealings with the city. The nonprofit has received a number of six-figure donations, including $350,000 from the American Federation of Teachers and a pair of $250,000 contributions from 1199 S.E.I.U. United Healthcare Workers East.People and companies that do business with the city have also given money. Two Trees Management Company, for example, gave $100,000 this year, a year after reaching a deal with the city to redevelop the Domino Sugar refinery in Brooklyn. The lobbying firm Capalino & Company gave $10,000; a day after the contribution, James F. Capalino, the firm’s chief executive, lobbied the mayor on behalf of a client.Dick Dadey, the executive director of Citizens Union, a government watchdog group, called the mayor’s use of the nonprofit “a new way of subverting the intent of limiting how big money influences government decisions.”“They know that when asked, they better pony up,” Mr. Dadey said of the group’s donors. “It’s not how our democracy should be operating.”Big Income for FirmsOne of the biggest beneficiaries of the mayor’s reliance on consultants has been Mr. Rosen’s firm, BerlinRosen. From the mayor’s inauguration on Jan. 1, 2014, through the middle of this year, the firm was paid about $490,000 by the nonprofit, according to lists of expenses provided by the group.The firm where Mr. Del Cecato is a partner, AKPD Message and Media, which works on communications strategy and advertising for political campaigns, was paid more than $1.1 million, most of which went toward television airtime.During that 18-month period, Mr. Baldick’s firm, Hilltop Public Solutions, where Mr. Hyers is now a partner, was paid about $230,000, along with about $100,000 paid by the 2013 campaign. (The city’s Campaign Finance Board limits what expenses are allowed after an election; the de Blasio campaign asserted the payments were appropriate.)Hilltop, a political consulting and public affairs firm, said it did not lobby city government, but it has clients that are keenly interested in decisions made at City Hall. Its clients include Airbnb and Fortis Property Group, which is redeveloping the former Long Island College Hospital complex in Brooklyn.Hilltop has numerous ties to City Hall beyond Mr. Baldick and Mr. Hyers. Another partner, Rebecca Katz, went to work for the administration as a top adviser, only to rejoin the consulting firm.When she left City Hall, Mr. de Blasio suggested in an interview at the time that those close to him never strayed far: “I borrow the line from ‘Hotel California’ by the Eagles: ‘You can check out anytime you want, but you can never leave.’ ”Hilltop also employed Stephanie Yazgi, who worked on Mr. de Blasio’s 2013 campaign and was the founding secretary of the Campaign for One New York. This year, Ms. Yazgi, whose girlfriend, Emma Wolfe, is one of the mayor’s top aides, moved from Hilltop to the de Blasio administration, where she was hired for a $150,000 position in the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs.Ms. Katz said Hilltop’s partners “do not offer lobbying services anywhere in the country and are mindful about not engaging in lobbying activities.” She declined to disclose the firm’s full list of clients in New York City, saying, “It is the firm’s policy to not discuss its clients with the media.”First Lady’s AttendanceOne day in April last year, New York City’s first lady, Chirlane McCray, stood at a lectern in the Pierre hotel on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. The nonprofit Coalition for the Homeless was holding an annual luncheon that is an important fund-raising event for the organization.“I bring you greetings from my husband, our mayor, Bill de Blasio,” Ms. McCray said. “Isn’t he doing a terrific job?”Her appearance at the event was months in the making.The Coalition for the Homeless is a client of BerlinRosen’s. In January 2014, Mary E. Brosnahan, the coalition’s president and chief executive, emailed Mr. Rosen with an invitation for Ms. McCray to be the keynote speaker at the luncheon.A half-hour later, Mr. Rosen forwarded her email to City Hall, adding his own pitch.“It’s a great event that Hillary Clinton and Arianna Huffington have keynoted in the past,” Mr. Rosen wrote, echoing a similar message from Ms. Brosnahan.He concluded with a request: “I really hope you will consider doing it.”Three minutes later, Ms. Katz, who at the time was a mayoral aide, wrote back. “Looks interesting,” she wrote, copying Ms. McCray’s newly appointed chief of staff and her scheduler. “Thanks, Jonathan.”The luncheon raised about $240,000 to support a job-training program, the coalition later said.Mr. Rosen’s request was one of a number of instances in which he dealt with City Hall on behalf of BerlinRosen clients — during the same period that he was advising Mr. de Blasio, and his firm was being paid by the mayor’s nonprofit. Some of BerlinRosen’s clients include the real estate companies SL Green Realty Corporation, Forest City Ratner Companies and Two Trees Management, as well as the ride-hailing company Lyft.“We do not lobby the mayor — or anybody else for that matter — and all of our communications with the administration are entirely appropriate,” said Dan Levitan, a vice president at BerlinRosen. Mr. Levitan is a good representative of the firm’s multilayered work for the mayor: He serves as the spokesman for the Campaign for One New York, and was a spokesman for Mr. de Blasio’s 2013 campaign.Last year, BerlinRosen successfully recruited Mr. de Blasio to record a video paying tribute to Forest City Ratner’s executive chairman, Bruce C. Ratner, and its president and chief executive, MaryAnne Gilmartin, that was played at a gala dinner for the Municipal Art Society of New York at which Mr. Ratner and Ms. Gilmartin were being honored.Mr. Rosen appears on the mayor’s schedules roughly two dozen times in the first 17 months of the administration, particularly toward the beginning. His wife, Debbie Rosen, who had served in the administration of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, was hired last year by the de Blasio administration, serving as chief of staff at the Office of Management and Budget.Earlier this year, Mr. de Blasio described Mr. Rosen as a close friend who “doesn’t represent the interests of his clients when he talks to me.”But emails obtained by The Times under the state’s Freedom of Information Law show that Mr. Rosen has represented the interests of his clients in exchanges with members of the de Blasio administration.Several of Mr. Rosen’s requests to City Hall concerned invitations for the mayor to attend events for his firm’s clients.In one instance, Mr. Rosen made what he described as “a shameless plug” for the mayor to appear at a gala for the Brooklyn Public Library. “Benefits public library system of our fav borough. (full disclosure I do their P.R.),” he wrote. The mayor did not attend the event.Before St. Patrick’s Day in 2014, Mr. Rosen suggested arranging an event with the mayor and one of his clients, the Irish Arts Center, for the holiday.Lindsay Scola, the mayor’s director of scheduling, seemed almost deferential to Mr. Rosen. “I am still trying to make this fit but not feeling super possible,” Ms. Scola wrote. “Do you feel like this is a must do?”“Not at all,” Mr. Rosen responded.The event was never arranged, but another administration official confirmed that Irish Arts Center officials had been invited to a morning reception at Gracie Mansion. The official, Ellyn Canfield, then extended the invitation to BerlinRosen staff members: “Does anyone at BerlinRosen want to come drink Irish coffee at Gracie at 7am on Monday?”“Thanks,” Mr. Rosen replied. “I’ll ask. Wow. 7 am.”In another example, a few weeks after the mayor’s inauguration, Mr. Rosen forwarded an invitation from the Democracy Alliance, a group of liberal political donors that is a BerlinRosen client, for the mayor to speak at a conference in Chicago.Michael Vachon, an adviser to the billionaire George Soros, had asked Mr. Rosen to pass along the invitation. (Mr. Soros endorsed Mr. de Blasio for mayor in 2013, and when Mr. de Blasio was public advocate, a Soros foundation donated $400,000 to a nonprofit that supported the public advocate’s work.)Mr. Rosen emailed Ms. Wolfe and Ross Offinger, a fund-raiser for the Campaign for One New York who had been finance director of the mayor’s 2013 campaign, writing, “Would this be at all possible. Vachon = Soros.”Three months later, Mr. de Blasio flew to Chicago to deliver the keynote address. This year, a Soros nonprofit, the Fund for Policy Reform, donated $250,000 to the Campaign for One New York.