This article was initially published as a letter to subscribers of The Upshot’s weekly newsletter. You can sign up for the email here to get this and all of the best of The Upshot.Ted Cruz received almost 4.5 million votes in the 2012 Texas Senate election, which he won in a landslide. Millions more Americans, outside Texas, agree with his aggressive brand of conservatism. He has been one of the most influential figures in Congress lately, and this week he became the first major candidate to announce an official 2016 presidential campaign.He also has virtually no chance of winning the Republican nomination, let alone of becoming president.So what are we in the media supposed to do about Mr. Cruz’s candidacy? He is, on the one hand, a major figure in American politics, with a dedicated following. On the other hand, many leading figures in the Republican Party — people who control money and influence voters — believe Mr. Cruz would severely damage the party’s chances of winning in 2016 and will fight against his candidacy if he becomes a serious threat.And he probably won’t ever become such a threat anyway. In early polls, Mr. Cruz trails other likely candidates by a wide margin. The prediction markets tracked by PredictWise give Mr. Cruz a 1.9 percent chance — even less, at last check, than Rick Perry’s odds — of being the nominee. Those markets have a strong historical record, with the notable exception that they often exaggerate the chances of long shots.Of course, the United States is a democracy, and no election is decided until the voters have had their say. Given that simple fact, it’s eminently sensible — and important — for the national media to cover Mr. Cruz’s announcement and forthcoming campaign in a serious fashion.But our role here at The Upshot is a little different from the rest of the media’s. It’s our job to tell you that Mr. Cruz’s candidacy is in all likelihood a sideshow that, at most, has the potential to influence the standing of stronger candidates. If the Republican campaign continues on its current course, the nominee will probably be Jeb Bush, Scott Walker or, though he has ground to make up, Marco Rubio. And if the campaign takes an unexpected turn, Mr. Cruz still is highly unlikely to be the beneficiary.“The most interesting question about Mr. Cruz’s candidacy,” Nate Cohn wrote this week, “is whether he has a very small chance to win or no chance at all.”One thing to remember about the democratic process is that it does not exist solely on Election Day. It also exists in the decisions that thousands of Republican Party voters, volunteers, operatives, donors and elected officials make in the months leading up to the primaries and caucuses. Their preferences profoundly shape the race. They are the reason, for instance, that Mitt Romney abandoned the idea of running for president again, despite an evident wish to do so. He understood that he did not have enough support to make a serious run for the nomination.(On the Democratic side, a similar version of those decisions is preventing most credible candidates — Elizabeth Warren, Deval Patrick, John Kerry, Joe Biden — from starting a campaign. They understand Hillary Clinton’s support is too strong.)Mr. Cruz, however, is willing to undertake a campaign even if he has little chance of winning. He has other reasons to run, such as trying to push the other Republican candidates to the right and to establish himself as the national spokesman for hard-core conservatism.Those are legitimate reasons for running. Indeed, if you share Mr. Cruz’s worldview, you might even say he has a duty to run. I don’t disagree. I would add only that it’s our duty to tell you he isn’t going to win.