Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Patriots’ game.Tom Brady threw for four touchdowns as the New England Patriots won their fourth Super Bowl late Sunday night, defeating the Seattle Seahawks, 28-24.The Patriots are the first team to rally from a 10-point fourth-quarter deficit to win the big game; the victory was sealed with an interception in the end zone with 26 seconds remaining.• White House unveils budget.The budget — $4 trillion for the 2016 fiscal year — proposed today by President Obama would hit corporations that keep profits overseas, raise taxes on the richest of the rich and try to increase the incomes of the middle class through new spending and tax credits.It will also be another area of conflict with Republicans in Congress.• Storm watch.A strong winter storm is moving out of the Midwest and into the Northeast and northern mid-Atlantic region today, bringing moderate to heavy snow, the National Weather Service says.• Crunchtime on Keystone.Today is the deadline for eight federal agencies, including the Environmental Protection Agency and the Interior, Commerce and Homeland Security departments, to finish their reviews of the Keystone XL pipeline.The State Department, which has jurisdiction over the pipeline because it crosses the border with Canada, is gathering the input before it determines whether the proposed pipeline is in the national interest.• A good problem to have.A clinical trial in Liberia of a drug to treat Ebola has been halted because of a sharp decline in the number of people infected with the virus.New cases in Liberia now number in the single digits, the World Health Organization says. Schools in the country will reopen in two weeks.• Jordan renews offer of prisoner swap.Jordan is working today to free a captive air force pilot held by the Islamic State, though his fate is unclear after a video was released over the weekend purporting to show the beheading of Kenji Goto, a Japanese hostage.Analysts say the militants’ tactics have backfired, especially in Jordan.• Pimping trial begins in France.Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the former chief of the International Monetary Fund, is accused of helping to procure sex workers for a prostitution ring based at a luxury hotel in the northern city of Lille.Mr. Strauss-Kahn, 65, faces up to 10 years in prison and a $1.7 million fine. He was forced to resign from his job at the I.M.F. when he was accused of sexually assaulting a hotel maid in New York in 2011. The charges were later dropped.MARKETS• Wall Street stocks  are mixed. European markets ended mixed, and Asian indexes closed down.• The Super Bowl Stock Market Predictor says that if a team from the old American Football League wins, as the Patriots did, the market will fall. The indicator has an 81 percent success rate.• The Justice Department is investigating Moody’s Investors Service for issuing favorable grades on mortgage deals in the buildup to the financial crisis, The Wall Street Journal reports.• Exxon Mobil, the world’s largest publicly traded oil and gas company, said today that its quarterly profit fell 21 percent as weak oil prices took a toll.OVER THE WEEKEND• Fighting in Ukraine worsened as cease-fire talks stalled.• Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey and former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida tried to win over the donors to Mitt Romney’s 2012 presidential campaign.• Pro-democracy protesters returned to the streets of Hong Kong.• New York City reached a $5 million settlement in a case that involved two detectives who served as assassins for the Mafia.• Scholars are beginning to assess the damage from a major fire at one of Russia’s most important libraries.• Serena Williams won her sixth Australian Open singles title and Novak Djokovic won his fifth.• “American Sniper” again topped the domestic movie box office, and prizes were awarded at the Sundance Film Festival.• Catching up on TV: We’ve got an episode recap for “Downton Abbey” and a look at Super Bowl commercials and the halftime show by Katy Perry.NOTEWORTHY• Check your car.Toyota, Chrysler and Honda are recalling about 2.1 million vehicles with airbags that might deploy even when the vehicle is not in a crash. Earlier recalls did not sufficiently address the problem.To determine whether your car is safe, visit safercar.gov.• Croatians get a clean start.The government is wiping out the debts of 60,000 people, taking a highly unusual step to bolster Croatia’s tepid economy.But some economists are skeptical that the plan will work.• In memoriam.Carl Djerassi, who synthesized a hormone that changed the world by creating the crucial ingredient for the oral contraceptive known as “the pill,” died at the age of 91.BACK STORYToday’s holiday, Groundhog Day, honors a weather-predicting rodent, but it could just as readily call to mind the 1993 Bill Murray movie.The romantic comedy was made part of the Library of Congress collection of culturally important American films in 2006.It has Mr. Murray’s character stuck in a time loop, forced to repeat the same 24 hours ad nauseam.But the concept of what Friedrich Nietzsche called “eternal recurrence” goes back centuries.The belief in time as circular, not linear, was part of the philosophies of Indians, Egyptians, Pythagoreans and Stoics, for instance.Timeline repetition was the theme of several stories that preceded “Groundhog Day”:“Christmas Every Day,” by William Dean Howells (1892)“The Strange Life of Ivan Osokin,” by P.D. Ouspensky (1915).“12:01 p.m.” by Richard A. Lupoff (1973).And “Replay” by Ken Grimwood in 1986.In fact, Mr. Lupoff accused the makers of “Groundhog Day” of plagiarizing his story. He eventually gave up the fight.Today, Buddhists and adherents of other religions find inspiration in the movie.Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.Want to get the briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.