BERLIN —  The German bloggers who were being investigated on suspicion they committed treason by publishing confidential government materials had multiple reasons to celebrate on Monday.Federal prosecutors announced that they were dropping their investigation into whether the journalists had broken the law by writing about government plans for online surveillance. And the decision just happened to come on the 11th birthday of Netzpolitik.org, an independent online monitor of surveillance and media freedom founded by one of the journalists, Markus Beckedahl.Better yet, Mr. Beckedahl said, the furor caused by the treason investigation has brought the website as many donations in the past 10 days as in all of last year.The decision to abandon the inquiry followed one of the loudest outcries over media freedom in Germany in years. But the announcement came as little surprise after a public dispute last week ended with the justice minister, Heiko Maas, successfully pressing for the ouster of the top federal prosecutor, Harald Range.The two men clashed over whether Mr. Maas had wrongly intervened in the criminal investigation of the journalists, which Mr. Range opened after a complaint from the head of Germany’s domestic intelligence service, Hans-Georg Maassen.Mr. Maassen has made little secret of his frustration at seeing confidential documents leaked to the media in recent months. The conservative daily Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung reported Monday in a five-page article on the affair on its website that he had sought to make an example.In the view of the newspaper, the effort backfired in late July when it became public that the subjects of Mr. Range’s inquiry, which began in May, were Mr. Beckedahl and his colleague, André Meister. A hue and cry ensued over media freedom and why the grave charge of treason had been employed, as the newspaper said, “to train the big guns of the judiciary on the poor bloggers of netzpolitik.org.”Fielding congratulations and phone calls on Monday, Mr. Beckedahl, 38, said that he and his colleague were relieved that the inquiry had been dropped.“But we demand clarity about why this was started in the first place three months ago,” he said in a telephone interview.Since the treason inquiry came to light, Mr. Beckedahl said, “no good lawyer has said that it was justified.” The bloggers now want to find out who in the government knew what, and when, and whether Mr. Range came under pressure, he said.Mr. Beckedahl also defended the publication of the original reports, which involved the budget of the domestic intelligence service and its online monitoring plans. Public interest demanded an open debate of these matters, he said. “Instead, all this was going on in secret, without a discussion. This is not worthy of a modern democracy.”Mr. Beckedahl said that investigations were continuing against the unidentified source who passed the information to the journalists. He also said that stronger laws to protect whistle-blowers were needed.The decision to investigate for treason stirred an uproar in Germany, where media freedom is a particularly delicate topic given the history of Nazi and Communist rule. In an important case in 1962, Franz Josef Strauss lost his job as defense minister after pursuing the newsweekly Der Spiegel for publishing documents that were described as secret.Michael Konken, head of the German Federation of Journalists, attributed the decision to drop the treason investigation to the broad opposition to the inquiry.“The attempt to criminalize the affected journalists failed spectacularly,” he said in a statement. He called for the rules covering treason investigations to be modified to exempt journalists.Steffen Seibert, a spokesman for Chancellor Angela Merkel, said at a news conference that the government would not comment on the prosecutors’ move, but he underlined the general commitment to media freedom.There was no immediate comment from Mr. Maassen, who has argued that it was essential to take a stand against publishing confidential or secret material to safeguard his office’s ability to fight extremism and terrorism.Mr. Beckedahl said that “we would be very happy to know more about exactly what role Mr. Maassen played, and what kind of responsibility he has to take.”The celebration of his site’s birthday, he said, would wait until Tuesday or Wednesday. Mr. Meister, who he said was on vacation, is one of five permanent staff members Mr. Beckedahl has been able to employ in recent years. Now, with some 150,000 euros raised during the last 10 days, “we can pay the lawyers and have enough left over to expand the newsroom.”