We’re trying something new: a quick nightly rundown of the day’s top stories. What do you think? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.1. Greece didn’t default, but it did delay a $335 million payment to the International Monetary Fund amid tensions over tough terms on a new deal with creditors. A Greek official said, “If what our partners want is full surrender, they’re not going to get it.”The move dampened markets. The S.&P. 500 lost 0.86% to finish at 2,095.84.2. Memorial services began for Beau Biden, the vice president’s son, who died over the weekend of brain cancer and whose burial will be Saturday. The Biden family, including Joe Biden’s only surviving son, left, headed into the visitation in Dover, Del.3. An ailing Serena Williams managed a semifinal win at the French Open and will face Lucie Safarova in a try at her 20th Grand Slam singles title. “She has a fever and the flu,” her coach said. “Hard to be performing on a tennis court in these conditions.”4. The crowd in Hong Kong seemed vast, but there were tens of thousands fewer people this year honoring the democracy activists who died 26 years ago at Tiananmen Square in Beijing. Some young people say pressuring the mainland government does no good.5. The so-called female Viagra took a major step toward the market, as government advisers voted 18 to 6 for its approval for premenopausal women — if measures are taken to limit side effects like low blood pressure, fainting, sleepiness, nausea and dizziness.6. The man convicted in a murder case that long gripped Washington won a new trial. His lawyers contend that a cellmate who said he confessed to killing the federal intern Chandra Levy in 2001 was lying.7. More than 3,000 Syrians fled into Turkey through one crossing point over the last two days, as Kurdish fighters moved against Islamic State militants in the Syrian north. In central Iraq, however, ISIS held the upper hand, closing off water from a dam to parch loyalist towns.8. South Korea’s outbreak of the deadly respiratory ailment known as MERS suddenly ballooned into the largest outside of the Middle East. A third person died, the number of confirmed cases rose to 36 and more than 1,000 schools and kindergartens closed.9. Members of Myanmar’s Rohingya minority collected rainwater for drinking at a camp in the country’s west, a day after they were allowed ashore. They had apparently failed in an attempt to reach another country, and the Burmese Navy kept their packed, drifting fishing boat at sea for days.10. Britain’s government said it would sell its remaining 30 percent stake in the Royal Mail to get $2.3 billion for deficit reduction. The name reflects how Charles I extended his own mailing rights to the public in 1635.11. Indonesian Muslims carried food into a cemetery for an annual ceremony honoring their ancestors ahead of Ramadan, which begins in mid-June this year.12. Looking ahead: OPEC meets Friday in Vienna. Analysts say Saudi Arabia is likely to keep up the high production that is undercutting energy companies in the U.S. and elsewhere.13. Good news: An experimental test that uses one drop of blood and costs as little as $25 can reveal nearly every virus a person has ever been exposed to. “I’m sure there’ll be lots of applications we haven’t even dreamed of,” said one of the scientists who made the announcement.Your Evening Briefing is published weeknights at 6 p.m. Eastern.And don’t miss Your Weekend Briefing, published Sundays at 7 a.m. Eastern.Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com