It’s never too early to start talking about the Oscars, which means that it’s always a good time to talk about something else. The New York Film Festival in its current incarnation offers incitements to both kinds of discourse. In recent years, this venerable institution of Manhattan cinephilia — or film snobbery, if you prefer — has devoted a good portion of its program to world and American premieres of prestigious Hollywood product. This year is no different. Since “The Walk” stepped out on opening night almost two weeks ago, audiences lucky or prescient enough to score tickets could take an early peek at “Steve Jobs,” a movie with an imposing Academy Award pedigree, and at Steven Spielberg’s “Bridge of Spies.”The festival, which ends on Sunday, wraps up with a possible preview of the battle for best actress. “Carol,” starring Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara as two women falling in love with each other in the repressive environment of middle-class America in the ’50s, has renewed the critical infatuation that began at Cannes in May. A contrasting but perhaps complementary view of female desire in the postwar era can be found in “Brooklyn,” a delicate adaptation, directed by John Crowley and written by Nick Hornby, of Colm Toibin’s novel of the same name. It stars Saoirse Ronan as a young woman from a small town in Ireland who immigrates to the titular borough and finds loneliness, romance and a new, hybrid identity. It’s a quiet, observant movie, with an aversion to melodrama and a sense of the ordinary that recalls old films like “Marty,” and its gentle nostalgia feels honest and unforced. Ms. Ronan, who as a child actor often seemed wise beyond her years, depicts the arrival of maturity with breathtaking poise and sensitivity.Anyone who wants to get a jump on possible Oscar nominees for 2017 — as I said, it’s never too soon! — should check out “Miles Ahead,” the closing-night film, directed by Don Cheadle, who also stars as the jazz trumpeter Miles Davis. Blending musical biopic standards (ill-starred marriage, drug addiction, record-company shenanigans) with caper-movie riffs (pistol-whippings, car chases, sketchy deals with shady characters), “Miles Ahead” at its best is as witty and knowing as Mr. Cheadle’s sly, whispery performance. The music is pretty good, too.But the New York Film Festival is also a place to find buried treasure, to dig beneath the hype and glamour toward the bedrock of ambitious, uncompromising filmmaking that has sustained this event for more than 50 years. Like, for example, “The Treasure,” the latest film from Corneliu Porumboiu, one of the stalwarts of the resurgent Romanian cinema in the past decade.Mr. Porumboiu, whose earlier films include “Police, Adjective” (2009) and “12:08 East of Bucharest” (2006), is a master of the long take, the stationary camera and the interminable argument. “The Treasure,” like his other films, concerns itself with a project that may be futile. An office worker is persuaded by a possibly deranged neighbor to dig for a fortune supposedly interred in the garden of a rural estate. It’s tedious, frustrating work, and Mr. Porumboiu turns it into deadpan comedy until the very end, when the film becomes a barbed allegory of globalization, and a reflection on Romania’s precarious, marginal place in post-Cold War Europe. The last shot and the final — which is to say the only — music cue provide a punch line as thrilling and haunting as anything I’ve seen on screen this year.Mr. Porumboiu is a filmmaker beyond category, as is Hong Sang-soo, the prolific anatomist of South Korean romantic disillusionment. Sometimes likened to Eric Rohmer (or even to Woody Allen), Mr. Hong tells moral tales of men and women in various states of emotional self-delusion or philosophical error. As fond of the zoom as Mr. Porumboiu is of the static shot, Mr. Hong likes to linger in a scene long past the point of comfort, allowing his characters and the audience to experience the full measure of awkwardness that accompanies long bouts of drinking, smoking, flirting and confessing. His new film, “Right Now, Wrong Then,” presents two versions of the same story. A middle-aged film director, on a quick trip to a small town, meets a young woman at a tourist attraction and … well, everything and nothing.There is great pleasure to be found in movies that bristle with incident and hum along on smoothly running wheels of plot. But there is also enormous satisfaction in movies in which nothing much happens, or at least very little that fits the conventional definition of drama. In their different ways, “Brooklyn,” “The Treasure” and “Right Now, Wrong Then” fulfill this criterion. So does Stéphane Brizé’s “The Measure of a Man,” in which Vincent Lindon plays a Frenchman struggling to support his family and maintain his dignity after being laid off from his job. His story plays out in a series of extended scenes, some tense and emotional, others matter-of-fact, all of them anchored by Mr. Lindon’s Everyman stoicism, which grows more heartbreaking at every moment.Mr. Brizé’s film at times feels less like a work of art than a window onto life. One way of describing this kind of immediacy is to say that a film is like a documentary, or to invoke variations on the fuzzy term “realism.” But those descriptions are too broad and too vague: They could be applied to Laszlo Nemes’s virtuosically brutal “Son of Saul,” an unsparing but also in its way highly stylized death-camp drama, and also to many other, lesser movies that mistake rough textures and harsh situations for profound insight. It helps perhaps to invoke the names of two great filmmakers, both represented in this eclectic and sometimes exhausting festival: Frederick Wiseman and Chantal Akerman.“In Jackson Heights” is among Mr. Wiseman’s masterpieces. An extended visit to a diverse, complicated neighborhood in Queens, the film is an immersive celebration of democracy, which they used to say in the ’60s was “one long meeting.” It turns out to be a lot of long meetings: of immigrants’-rights groups; of older gays and lesbians, of weary workers and patient politicians. Under Mr. Wiseman’s watchful, empathetic eye, the ordinary rises to the level of poetry.There is also poetry in “No Home Movie,” Ms. Akerman’s wistful, difficult essay on memory, mortality and family ties. For more than four decades, Ms. Akerman’s films have challenged viewers to think hard thoughts about power, gender and representation, and have usefully defeated the usual distinctions and definitions. She has migrated — never easily, always with great effort and deliberation — between fiction and documentary, between the personal and the political. “No Home Movie,” organized around a series of conversations between the filmmaker and her mother, a Holocaust survivor, is a defiant memoir of grief.Even more so after the shocking news of Ms. Akerman’s death in Paris on Monday. The loss is beyond measuring, beyond words. Her films are full of silences that register how intractable and painful everyday experiences can be. Instead of comfort or redemption, they offer blunt truth, which becomes its own kind of beauty. The festival that was preparing to honor and celebrate her work is now a place where the work of mourning will begin.