KABUL, Afghanistan —  With Afghanistan’s fractious coalition government already struggling, a new deadline looms that could further hurt its credibility: The Afghan Parliament’s term is set to expire on Sunday, with no elections scheduled and no agreement on how to hold them.As a last-ditch measure, President Ashraf Ghani’s office issued a decree on Friday to extend Parliament’s term. In a statement, his office said Parliament “will continue its work” until elections could be held, and that a date for those elections would be announced within a month. But some critics said the move was unconstitutional.It was unclear whether the extension decree would satisfy international donors, who had earlier said they would withhold financing for new elections because of the impasse.An overhaul of the electoral process in time to elect a new Parliament was a central element of the power-sharing deal, brokered by the United States, between Mr. Ghani and his rival in last year’s disputed presidential vote, Abdullah Abdullah.The agreement nominally ended a political crisis that some feared could devolve into factional conflict, and Mr. Abdullah joined the government with the largely undefined title of chief executive. But in the 10 months since the government took office, conciliation between Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah has been hard to find, officials say. The government has struggled even to permanently fill key positions like defense minister, attorney general and chief justice of the Supreme Court.Even with Parliament now extended temporarily, there is still no branch of the Afghan government whose legitimacy has not been clouded in some way.“At the outset of the new government, first our executive power lost its legitimacy, because it is formed based on a so-called political agreement,” said Gul Rahman Qazi, a law professor who was chairman of the Constitutional Oversight Commission in the previous administration. “Besides that, we are witnessing that the judiciary’s power is being run by an acting head that entirely has no legitimate reference in the constitutional law, either. As a final point, we have our legislative power, whose term will end.”Both Mr. Ghani’s and Mr. Abdullah’s camps agree that no elections should be held until the process is overhauled. They disagree on how to proceed, and even on who should oversee the overhaul. That has led officials on both sides, as well as other Afghan and Western officials, to suggest that the electoral issue will pose the biggest challenge that the fragile governmental partnership has yet faced.Adding to concern is that Mr. Abdullah’s extra-constitutional role as chief executive also has an expiration date. His agreement with Mr. Ghani called for the Constitution to be amended within two years through a loya jirga, or grand council of elders. According to the Constitution, that jirga cannot be held until after elections for Parliament and for district councils, whose members make up a large portion of the jirga.“The question isn’t just whether we will be facing a vacuum of legitimacy,” said Zekria Barakzai, the director general of Afghanistan Democracy Watch, a civil society group. “The question is, ‘How long are we going to continue with this trend of destabilizing elections?’ ”Mr. Abdullah and Mr. Ghani did not even begin serious discussions on the issue until March, six months after the government was inaugurated. When they did meet, they could not agree on who would head an electoral reform commission. Mr. Ghani drew criticism for nominating one of his more vocal campaign allies, the lawmaker Shukria Barakzai, for the post. Mr. Abdullah immediately rejected her.Ms. Barakzai has since taken her bitterness over the episode to Parliament. During a televised session, she questioned the legality of Mr. Abdullah’s post as chief executive. In the ensuing furor, an Abdullah supporter and member of Parliament, Hafiz Mansour, shouted at another lawmaker, “I will smash your face.”One of the thorniest issues is the fate of the officials who oversaw the contested 2014 presidential vote, which cost international donors nearly half a billion dollars and was denounced by international monitors as deeply fraudulent. The monitors said all sides were to blame, but Mr. Ghani was thought by many to have benefited the most from irregularities.Mr. Abdullah says no elections can be held until the fate of those election officials is decided. But none of the election officials have been charged with any crime, and they cannot easily be removed from office.Mahmoud Saikal, a senior adviser to Mr. Abdullah, said his camp would not stop short of “unveiling the faces behind the huge fraud in 2014.”For both leaders, the discussions are charged claims of victimhood. Mr. Abdullah’s aides have said the 2014 election was stolen from him. Mr. Ghani’s advisers have complained of “bullies” in the Abdullah camp, who forced them to accept the coalition government agreement by threatening unrest.