Shortly after Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York and his national advocacy group trumpeted plans last month to hold a presidential forum in Iowa, he took part in a conference call to rev up the liberal faithful.Addressing members from around the country, Mr. de Blasio spoke of preparing for a sustained war on inequality — the very topic of the Dec. 6 forum, which organizers believed would be a harbinger of the group’s intent to play on the national stage.Those plans collapsed this week. The de Blasio-backed group canceled its event, explaining in a statement that it would redirect its energies into other methods of tackling inequality.On Wednesday, Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, acknowledged a more humbling reality: Not a single presidential candidate had agreed to attend.The disintegration of the Iowa conclave was the most significant setback yet for the Progressive Agenda Committee, an ambitious but halting enterprise that has prompted questions about Mr. de Blasio’s political judgment, and has tested his clout as a local official with baldly ideological aspirations.Mr. de Blasio and his allies say the group is a necessary vehicle to rally liberal elites behind a cohesive message. Inspired by a policy agenda that he unveiled in Washington in May, covering topics such as union rights and international trade, the Progressive Agenda Committee is now organized as a nonprofit, with its own executive director and political director.But the project, founded by Mr. de Blasio and backed by influential labor leaders and former City Hall aides, has faced a series of unexpected setbacks: Prominent elected officials have hesitated to commit themselves. Some leaders who endorsed his policy manifesto have had second thoughts about promoting such a grandly ideological document.Even the rise of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont in the presidential race has presented a challenge for the Progressive Agenda Committee, prompting the group to reconsider its goals now that a self-described socialist has already electrified the Democratic primary with heated talk about inequality. (Mr. de Blasio endorsed Hillary Rodham Clinton in the Democratic race last month.)The project has also sharply divided advisers to Mr. de Blasio, some of whom counseled the mayor to reconsider the Iowa forum, concerned that it had deepened perceptions of Mr. de Blasio as excessively preoccupied with national politics, according to people familiar with their reservations.These people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss private conversations, said Mr. de Blasio held out on having the forum until just a few days before it was canceled, convinced that the event would ultimately advance the broader cause of his liberal group.Others in the mayor’s circle remain intensely committed: John Del Cecato, one of Mr. de Blasio’s closest advisers who is widely viewed as the most enthusiastic champion of the project, defended it this week as having helped move the national political debate in a liberal direction.Mr. de Blasio emphasized on Wednesday that he was invested in making the Progressive Agenda Committee a success and vowed to put “years and years of effort” into pressing its inequality message forward.“We are going to be doing activities all over the country and in Washington to keep pushing the issue of income inequality to the fore,” Mr. de Blasio said, adding, “We’re going to keep trying new strategies until we find the ones that we think work best.”Amid the public clamor over Mr. de Blasio’s foray into presidential politics, other aspects of the Progressive Agenda Committee have begun to take shape.The organization, which at first appeared intended to shape the 2016 election by pressuring Mrs. Clinton from the left, has sketched out a more gradual timeline for its activities, aimed at preparing to extract liberal policy achievements from the next president.Geri Prado, a former A.F.L.-C.I.O. strategist who joined the Progressive Agenda Committee over the summer as its executive director, said the group had begun to assemble a “message calendar” for the progressive movement aimed squarely at the first quarter of 2017.“We want to make sure that in the first 100 days of 2017, people are fulfilling their promises around income inequality,” Ms. Prado said in an interview.Ms. Prado, who is based in Washington, has wooed liberal leaders with a PowerPoint presentation that lists a series of national ills — including the “Corporatization of America” — and detailed tactics to address them.The function of the committee, according to a copy of the presentation, is to help provide a consistent message for a diverse array of activist communities on the left.The presentation repeatedly invokes the image of a religious congregation and states that this particular group’s role is to provide “hymnals for the choir.”The Progressive Agenda Committee intends to hold regular planning calls featuring a range of liberal leaders — not just Mr. de Blasio — outlining the elements of what it views as a successful liberal economic message, according to people familiar with the plans. (It has already held calls to highlight research by the Roosevelt Institute, a liberal think tank, and Democracy Corps, a Democratic polling project focused on economic messaging.)In mass emails, organizers have urged members of the group to help create a drumbeat around key liberal priorities: One message last Friday offered sample Twitter posts, suggesting that members use social media to proclaim, “Wall Street and the superrich are gaming the stock market.”The group has also taken steps to reduce Mr. de Blasio’s presence: The mayor’s name did not appear on the invitations sent to presidential candidates, and organizers said he would have played no speaking role at the forum.Still, Mr. de Blasio confers with Ms. Prado at least once a week about the organization’s activities. And if the group wants to channel a broader set of voices, beyond City Hall, Mr. de Blasio and the stature of his office have plainly been the animating forces behind its public activities so far.The first glimmers of the Progressive Agenda emerged last spring, when Mr. de Blasio convened a meeting at Gracie Mansion in April with other left-leaning Democrats, to discuss economic issues. By the next month, at least two City Hall aides, Stephanie Yazgi and Jonathan Viguers, were involved in efforts to recruit endorsers for the Progressive Agenda, according to emails obtained through public records requests.Early on, Mr. de Blasio personally solicited support for the agenda from leading Democrats.Howard Dean, the former Vermont governor and presidential candidate who also served as chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said he joined the group because of a direct appeal from Mr. de Blasio, and called it a useful gathering point for liberal leaders.“He’s basically trying to, I think, put together a counterweight to the right,” Mr. Dean said, adding, “There are not that many forums where national progressives all get together and talk.”But Mr. de Blasio’s back-channel recruitment efforts also revealed his limitations as a liberal field marshal. He repeatedly sought support from Mayor Edwin M. Lee of San Francisco, a fellow Democrat, telling him in a personal email that his backing would be a “great boost” to the organization.When Mr. Lee offered a noncommittal response, Mr. de Blasio pressed the issue, asking him to consider signing on by the following day. Mr. Lee did not.Other outreach efforts have yielded only impermanent results. Mr. Sanders, whom the mayor has praised as an important spokesman for the left, agreed in a phone call with Mr. de Blasio to participate in the Iowa forum. But the Sanders campaign never ultimately made a formal commitment.Even among officials who signed on to the group, some have balked at promoting the Progressive Agenda with their own energies.Mayor Steve Adler of Austin, Tex., gave his stamp of approval to Mr. de Blasio’s policy manifesto, but in emails privately fretted with aides about how far to take the partnership. “Much of this is national stuff, which could be divisive here,” Mr. Adler’s chief of staff, John-Michael Cortez, cautioned in an email.Jason Stanford, a spokesman for Mr. Adler, said there were areas of overlap between the Texas mayor’s ideas and Mr. de Blasio’s liberal platform. But, he added, “There are other things there that just aren’t part of our agenda that are perceived as national political issues, and not what the mayor’s trying to accomplish here in Austin.”