CLAREMONT, N.H. —  In her first week as a 2016 presidential candidate, Hillary Rodham Clinton seemed to channel another high-profile Democrat. “The deck is stacked in their favor,” Mrs. Clinton said of the wealthy and powerful. “My job is to reshuffle the cards.”The line echoed a phrase that helped make Senator Elizabeth Warren the populist icon of her party. “The game is rigged,” Ms. Warren often says. “Rigged to work for those who have money and power.”Before that, there was Mrs. Clinton’s tribute to Ms. Warren in Time magazine. “She never hesitates to hold powerful people’s feet to the fire,” Mrs. Clinton wrote in the issue honoring the top 100 influential people.For anyone who wondered what kind of economic message Mrs. Clinton would deliver in her campaign, the first few days made it clear: She is embracing the ideas trumpeted by Ms. Warren and the populist movement — that the wealthy have been benefiting disproportionately from the economy while the middle class and the poor have been left behind. And the policies Mrs. Clinton is advancing, like paid sick leave for employees and an increase in the minimum wage, align with that emphasis.But now, the former secretary of state must persuade voters that she is the right messenger for the cause of inequality, not simply seizing on it out of political expedience.Nothing stings members of her inner circle more than the suggestion that their candidate is late to these issues. Mrs. Clinton was the original Elizabeth Warren, her advisers say, a populist fighter who for decades has been an advocate for families and children; only now have the party and primary voters caught up.“I don’t know why we have this semicollective amnesia about her past positions,” said Neera Tanden, the president of the Center for American Progress and Mrs. Clinton’s policy director in 2008. “She’s following no one on these issues.”But affirming Mrs. Clinton’s sincerity as a populist, especially given her reputation for caution and careful consideration of political moves, is proving an uphill battle. The assessment by Bloomberg Politics after Mrs. Clinton’s first campaign stops was that she is “terrified of the left.”It is easy to forget that for years, Mrs. Clinton weathered criticism that she was too liberal, the socialist foil to her husband’s centrist agenda. Economists in the Clinton administration referred to the first lady and her aides as “the Bolsheviks.”In Mrs. Clinton’s 2008 presidential campaign, she positioned herself as the populist candidate to the left of Barack Obama on several economic issues, angering some of her Wall Street donors and earning broad support among organized labor and working-class voters.Advisers have lists at the ready outlining Mrs. Clinton’s calls as early as 2007 to eliminate the so-called carried interest loophole, roll back the Bush-era tax cuts for the wealthy, impose tighter regulations on derivatives and place limits on chief executives’ compensation.“Let’s finally do something about the growing economic inequality that is tearing our country apart,” Mrs. Clinton said during her campaign, appearing at the Take Back America conference, a gathering of liberal groups, in June 2007. “The top 1 percent of our households,” she added, “held 22 percent of our nation’s wealth.”“Enough with the corporate welfare,” she continued. “Enough with the golden parachutes. And enough with the tax incentives for companies to shift jobs overseas.”A 16-page dossier, titled “Hillary Clinton: A Lifetime Champion of Income Opportunity” and assembled by a close friend and adviser to Mrs. Clinton, calls Ms. Warren a “footnote.” The document, provided to The New York Times, presents 40 instances in which Mrs. Clinton took the same stance as Ms. Warren on issues — like organized labor and tax increases on the wealthy — in some cases years before the senator’s ascent in the national spotlight.But that was then, and this is now, when everything Mrs. Clinton does will be viewed through the lens of a party under the influence of Ms. Warren and her blistering critique of the financial sector.Robert B. Reich, a secretary of labor during the Clinton administration who has advised Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, said the comparison with Ms. Warren “personalizes it far too much.”“This is a broad-based movement to take back our democracy and make the economy work for everybody instead of a small group at the top,” he said.For seven years, Mrs. Clinton has been out of domestic policy, and in that time, the populist movement has caught fire. In the years Mrs. Clinton served as secretary of state and since she left the State Department in early 2013, she has become more associated with the centrist policies of the Bill Clinton years than with policies of raising taxes on the wealthy and increasing government services that have become widely adopted on the left.“This perception comes because she wasn’t involved in the discussion for so long,” Anita Dunn, a Democratic strategist, said of Mrs. Clinton. Because, she added, in the White House “she had this reputation as being the very left-wing, liberal, Elizabeth Warren type.”During the same period when Mrs. Clinton was absent from domestic debates, the policies of the Bill Clinton years were recast.In her 2008 campaign, Mrs. Clinton cited the prosperity of the 1990s. Today, the trade deals, Wall Street deregulation and deficit reduction that Mr. Clinton oversaw are often blamed as contributing to the divide between a tiny sliver of the wealthiest and the vast majority of Americans.“I remember when Bill Clinton was running in 1992 and his line was ‘putting people first,’ ” said Dean Baker, an economist and a director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research. “He just didn’t follow through on that,” and instead emphasized deficit reduction and trade deals, he added.On Friday, Mrs. Clinton subtly distanced herself from the trade policies associated with the 1990s. In response to a trade agreement reached Thursday by Republican and Democratic leaders, her spokesman, Nick Merrill, said Mrs. Clinton believed that any trade deal should protect American workers, raise wages and create jobs in the United States.“The goal is greater prosperity and security for American families, not trade for trade’s sake,” Mr. Merrill said in a statement.Mrs. Clinton will begin to present more specific policy proposals next month. In the meantime, she has expressed support for an increase in the minimum wage, paid family medical leave and the closing of corporate tax loopholes.In a meeting with economists this year, Mrs. Clinton intensely studied a chart that showed income inequality in the United States. The graph charted how real wages, adjusted for inflation, had increased exponentially for the wealthiest Americans, making the bar so steep it hardly fit on the chart.Mrs. Clinton pointed at the top category and said the economy required a “toppling” of the wealthiest 1 percent, according to several people who were briefed on her policy discussions but could not discuss private conversations for attribution.Still, Mrs. Clinton will pitch that “toppling” with a very different style from Ms. Warren, a bankruptcy expert whose populist message has been laser-focused on holding Wall Street accountable. Mrs. Clinton will present proposals for changes in the tax code as a way of also investing in education, infrastructure and communities.Mrs. Clinton “wakes up asking how she can accomplish real things for families, not who she can attack,” said Gene B. Sperling, an economic adviser in the Clinton and Obama administrations. He added, “When she shows that fighting populist edge, it is for a purpose.”