A few minutes before my meeting with Hillary Clinton on the Fourth of July, during my drive to the Mount Washington hotel in Bretton Woods, N.H., where she was staying, I passed a moose near the side of the road. At first I thought it was fake, one of those life-size cutouts that you sometimes see of big land mammals or, on occasion, famous politicians. But the specimen proved to be real and spectacular, antlers and all. I had never seen a moose before. It was thrilling, and I felt compelled to tell Clinton about it within seconds of my arrival. ‘‘Oh, really? Wow,’’ Clinton exclaimed with a big smile as she poured herself a cup of coffee. She might have been humoring me, but still seemed genuinely excited by my sighting and seized on it as a point of connection.We were meeting in an old conference room of the grand hotel, which is perhaps best known to history as the site of the Bretton Woods Conference, a gathering of delegates from 44 countries to regulate the international financial system after World War II. Clinton and I sat at the same table where the agreement that established the International Monetary Fund was signed in 1944. As a former first lady, senator and secretary of state, Clinton was of course no stranger to such heady sites of statecraft. But what we started talking about was the moose. She had seen a few in her day, she told me. ‘‘I’ve eaten moose, too,’’ she said. ‘‘I’ve had moose stew.’’Clinton explained that during college she worked one summer in Alaska, washing dishes at a resort. She was 21, and her energy and freedom felt limitless; she took long hikes in the midnight sun. ‘‘The guides told us the most dangerous animals in the park — more than the grizzlies, because the grizzlies will basically ignore you — were the moose,’’ she said. Natives knew to keep their distance. But the moose were all over, impossible to miss. ‘‘Oh, I mean like, between you and me,’’ Clinton said, and I thought for a second she was about to tell me something conspiratorial (‘‘between you and me’’), but in fact she was simply describing how close she had been to a moose, roughly the same distance as we were sitting from each other there at the birthplace of the I.M.F.Hillary Clinton is private and guarded by nature, and three decades of being inspected like an exotic species has made her even more so. But right now, in the early days of what will be a 19-month campaign for the White House, she is trying to share and expound on her experi­ences, to project some greater measure of herself, big and small. Moose tales aside, this does not come easily. She has resided at the center of so many scandals, psychodramas and culture wars that it’s hard to even keep track of them all, let alone know what the person within that bubble of attention is actually like.Clinton had a full day of campaigning ahead of her — a house party, a parade and a stop at a restaurant. The weather was clear and sunny, and she was full of laughs and stories and, at this moment at least, seemed content to be back out in the wild. Clinton broke into a big laugh upon being told that a manager from the Mount Washington hotel had corrected me for not referring to Britain’s most prominent representative to the Bretton Woods Conference as ‘‘Lord John Maynard Keynes’’ (I had omitted the ‘‘Lord’’). The day before, at a rally in Hanover, she described a road trip she once took to a conference at Dartmouth, back when she was in college at Wellesley. She had a blind date there, she told the audience, and they laughed. She is trying to give out more details like that. Voters appreciate it when they recognize bits of themselves in their would-be leaders — knowing that they, too, have gone on blind dates, cared for aging parents or maybe recently welcomed a granddaughter. These are things Hillary Clinton has been talking about as she has undertaken the messy practice of what political types refer to as ‘‘reintroducing’’ — or, in Clinton’s case, re-re-re-reintroducing.Still, all those introductions and forays into hostile territories have left her with battle scars. She is wary to a point where the control-freak tendencies of her campaign, especially with regard to how she is portrayed in the press, have reinforced an established story line: that she is sealed off and inaccessible and not like the rest of us. ‘‘DO YOU HAVE A PERCEPTION PROBLEM?’’ a reporter shouted out at her during Clinton’s last visit to New Hampshire, not quite the icebreaker you’d wish for when making reintroductions. As a rule, the media is not Clinton’s preferred confidant. Her campaign at first declined to make her available for an interview. It did offer me an ‘‘off the record’’ meeting, which is highly irregular: an off-the-record sit-down with a profile subject who happens to be running for president, and who is not exactly new to these rodeos. (I demurred on the off-the-record sit-down, at least at first.)Clinton’s friends, all the thousands of them, have been saying for years that they wished people could see the Hillary They Knew, the person few get to see behind her public casing: the great boss, the chatty girlfriend, always the first to call when a parent dies or a baby is born. She possesses, they swear, that most cherished cachet among politicians — the sense of normalcy that David Foster Wallace famously described, quoting a fellow reporter in his 2000 profile of John McCain in Rolling Stone, as acting ‘‘somewhat in the ballpark of the way a real human being would act.’’ Clinton imagines herself to be very much of this ballpark, if maybe confined to a private box and heavily guarded.In the kickoff rally for her campaign last month, Clinton said she would not be fazed by the accelerated graying of hair brought on by presidential stresses — because, she said, ‘‘I’ve been coloring it for years.’’ The line, which she had used previously, got a nice laugh. It was a good moment (relatable), and later I would receive a call from someone who would only be identified as a ‘‘senior campaign official’’ assuring me that Hillary had come up with the line herself. An actual authentic everyday quip, more or less.If only you could know the person I know is a recurring lament among friends of candidates who, for whatever reason, have been deemed deficient on the likable-relatable scale. My reporting of this article coincided with the release of thousands of emails that Clinton had written and received during her time as secretary of state. As is well known, the emails do not include the thousands of missives, presumably deleted for good, that the former secretary had exchanged on a personal email server she had in her home. The first tranches of emails contained no bombshells or really anything damning at all. But they were nonetheless arresting and met with a level of fascination among readers, in large part over how they made Clinton appear so relatively ordinary as she went about her rarefied business.She shared exasperated emails with her assistant Huma Abedin over how to use a fax machine and accepted, almost giddily, a compliment about a coat she wore on a trip to Afghanistan (‘‘Thx! I bought the coat in Kabul in 03 and thought it should get a chance to go home for a visit!!’’). Presidential campaigns expend hundreds of millions of dollars to ‘‘package’’ and ‘‘humanize’’ their candidate only to have these more unguarded renderings do it far better, and usually free. (Mitt Romney, whose friends also bemoaned voters’ inability to see the ‘‘real’’ him, never looked more appealing than he did in ‘‘Mitt,’’ last year’s Netflix documentary that portrayed the candidate behind the scenes.)I have interviewed Clinton many times over the years, in various depths. She possesses an odd and at times even absurdist appreciation for her predicament as the woman whom aides described as the ‘‘most famous person that nobody knows.’’ After long overseas trips as secretary of state, Clinton and her staff would unwind on the flight home by watching mindless movies; she tells of seeing the 2007 thriller ‘‘Breach,’’ in which a Russian spy declares: ‘‘I disapprove of women in pantsuits. Men wear pants. … The world doesn’t need any more Hillary Clintons.’’ The plane busted out laughing, no one harder than the secretary.Clinton clearly sees her public identity in terms of the battles she has endured. She often recites a favorite saying of Eleanor Roosevelt’s. Women in politics, Roosevelt said, need ‘‘to develop skin as tough as rhinoceros hide.’’ In 2007, she expanded on the metaphor to me in her own words. ‘‘I joke that I have the scars to show from my experiences,’’ she said. ‘‘But you know, our scars are part of us, and they are a reminder of the experiences we’ve gone through, and our history. I am constantly making sure that the rhinoceros skin still breathes. And that’s a challenge that all of us face. But again, not all of us have to live it out in public.’’During that campaign, I met John Peavoy, a childhood friend of Hillary Rodham’s from Park Ridge, Ill. They became pen pals after going off to college (Rodham to Wellesley, Peavoy to Prince­ton). Peavoy, who went on to teach English at Scripps College in California, kept a stash of about 30 letters from Rodham, which he shared with me for an article I was reporting for The Times. In one, she described her wish of being a little girl again and her childlike sense of being alone in the universe. ‘‘Everyone else would disappear’’ if she turned around quickly, she wrote. ‘‘I’d play out in the patch of sunlight that broke the density of the elms in front of our house and pretend there were heavenly movie cameras watching my every move.’’ She wrote of how she craved all of the excitement and discoveries of life without losing ‘‘the little girl in the sunlight.’’Though the letters were from long ago, I never viewed Clinton the same way after I read them. They were impressively self-aware for a college student, and in places even foreshadowed the public roles she would go on to play and the shifting identities they entailed. ‘‘Since Xmas vacation, I’ve gone through three and a half metamorphoses and am beginning to feel as though there is a smorgasbord of personalities spread before me,’’ Rodham wrote in April 1967. ‘‘So far, I’ve used alienated academic, involved pseudo-hippie, educational and social reformer and one-half of withdrawn simplicity.’’ For as much as Clinton or anyone has evolved over 50 years, the letters offer a reminder that, at the very least, there is someone markedly different inside and away from the sunlight.As first lady, Clinton openly entertained fantasies of escaping her bubble and indulging in flings of anonymity. ‘‘On a recent trip to Arkansas, I had a sudden impulse to drive,’’ she wrote in a syndicated column from 1995. ‘‘I jumped behind the wheel of a car and, much to the discomfort of my Secret Service detail, drove myself around town. For several hours, I enjoyed a marvelous sensation of personal freedom.’’ She went on to describe the ‘‘odd duality’’ of her public life and lamented how ‘‘experiences that millions of Americans take for granted have become extraordinary for me.’’At an appearance in April of last year in Portland, Ore., Clinton was asked what it was like to have lived most of her adult life under such scrutiny. She reminisced about her early days in Arkansas, back when she drove her own car and took Chelsea to ballet class. She betrayed an almost wistful longing for that time, contrasting her energy and freedom then with the exhaustions of her public life today — ‘‘the level of relentless scrutiny that now stalks not just people in politics but people in all kinds of public arenas,’’ in her phrase. ‘‘It gives you a sense of being kind of dehumanized, I guess.’’The starkness of this language jumped out at me — “stalks” and, especially, “dehumanized,” a term we associate with subjects of nefarious experiments or victims of unspeakable abuse. They betrayed an ambivalence toward the unnatural habitat that Clinton had chosen for her life and toward the onslaught that she would subject herself to as soon as she started running again.Leading up to this campaign, Clinton made noises about maybe taking a less cautious approach. ‘‘It does seem to me that you’re pretty free to speak your mind these days,’’ her friend and former speechwriter Lissa Muscatine observed during a conversation onstage at George Washington University in June of last year, while Clinton was promoting her latest midcareer memoir, ‘‘Hard Choices.’’ Clinton told Muscatine: ‘‘Maybe it’s because I’m totally done with being really careful about what I’m going to say. It just gets too exhausting and frustrating.’’She began her campaign in April by hopping into a decked-out campaign van, christened Scooby, and bolting for Iowa. Pretty much everyone I talked to on her campaign made a point of mentioning that this road trip was the candidate’s idea. It was important that I knew that. But there was a tentative feel to the self-conscious joy ride. At one point, Scooby stopped at a Chipotle in Ohio, which resulted in the most scrutinized fast-food order in history (a kind of Watergate for burrito bowls). The drop-by yielded a memorable still of the candidate, frozen on a security camera and ordering alone — a testimonial to public life in all its hyperdissected isolation.From the outset of the campaign, any hope that Clinton might unveil a more freewheeling style in keeping with the more unplugged sensibilities of today’s political and media culture lasted for all of, well, never. Signs of apparent spontaneity and whimsy have been nonexistent — she has been largely steadfast in avoiding interviews, with a campaign team that can convey a heavy-handed preoccupation with control. Conversations I have had with officials tend to be vigilantly ground-ruled. In June, I visited Clinton’s Brooklyn Heights headquarters to interview Robby Mook, her 35-year-old campaign manager. The meeting had been arranged through Jesse Ferguson, a campaign press minder, who in advance of my arrival sent me an email that said the following: ‘‘The ground rules we’ve had with others in our office is that the office itself is OTR,’’ meaning off the record. ‘‘I don’t want to get into a contest of people tweeting pic from our office to show they were there.’’I wrote back that I was not abiding by any ‘‘office is off the record’’ provisions and that it was not clear to me how you could declare a 40,000-square-foot space off the record. I did agree not to tweet.Ferguson came back asking me if I would ‘‘embargo’’ anything that I saw in the office until the time my article was published. He made it sound as if I were gaining access to the Situation Room. ‘‘Regardless when the story runs,’’ he wrote, it ‘‘still means you’re the first reporter who can report anything from the office.’’(Now I feel obligated to reveal something interesting from the office, which basically resembled a large insurance company in its expanse of cubicles. Here’s something: I spotted Reggie Love, President Obama’s semifamous ‘‘body man,’’ meeting with someone in a conference room. He says he was visiting a friend.)Out on the trail, the tired stare-downs — Clinton versus press mobs — keep playing out in the same joyless collisions between solipsistic meteors in a contained galaxy. In late May, I went to watch Clinton speak at a microbrewery in Hampton, N.H. She arrived just before noon in Scooby, and the owners of the brewery led her on a tour. Clinton asked if she could hold some of the grain in her hands, and generally performed the practiced Kabuki of the candidate looking interested on a factory tour. ‘‘How long is the process?’’ she asked. ‘‘Where does the barley come from?’’The campaign was only weeks old at that point, but the press horde had already achieved midseason peevishness. A few days before the brewery visit in New Hampshire, Ed Henry of Fox News interrupted a round table that Clinton was hosting in Cedar Falls, Iowa, by yelling out, ‘‘Secretary Clinton, will you take questions from the media as well?’’ Henry is a cheerful, toothy-grinned character — armed with ‘‘tough questions’’ and killer pocket squares — who clearly relishes his role as a soldier for democracy on America’s highest-rated cable news network. He protested that Clinton had not answered anything from the press in a month. She was noncommittal in her response and not a bit sarcastic: ‘‘I will put it on my list for due consideration.’’ Finally, Clinton approached the hungry cluster. ‘‘Tell me something I don’t know,’’ she said in a greeting that I took as a somewhat passive-aggressive recognition that she had seen this dance so many times before: same as it ever was, only this time with Twitter.‘‘What makes you so special,’’ a voice boomed out, ‘‘that you don’t have to answer the press’s questions every day?’’ In an almost serene voice, Clinton broke into dorm proctor mode and urged the overcaffeinated kids to ‘‘bring some order out of this, bring some order.’’ The whole spectacle yielded nothing of consequence, though it did provide Henry with a dubious bragging right. ‘‘The reason she had a news conference,’’ he said later in his report on Fox News, ‘‘is because I started shouting questions.’’Here at the brewery a few days later, a similar scene transpired. A clutch of about 100 media types waited for Clinton next to boxes of beer stacked several feet high. She walked over and was promptly swallowed up into a familiar scrum of leaned-in torsos, outstretched tape recorders, jostling cameras and furry boom mikes.‘‘SECRETARY CLINTON, A LOT OF PEOPLE DON’T THINK YOU’RE TELLING THE TRUTH ABOUT BENGHAZI.’’‘‘WHAT ABOUT THE EMAILS?’’I was standing just behind Clinton for this display, which afforded me the same vantage point she had. It was a rare perspective, to look up into a mob of inquisitors staring and smirking back. She has been in the middle of so many thousands of these, for so many years now, that the layers of déjà vu — especially here in New Hampshire — probably don’t even register. This is abjectly normal for her. But you can understand how it could be terrifying to the uninitiated. It helps explain why people would ask Clinton, as they do all the time, how she has the stomach for another one of these. Where does the barley come from?I couldn’t see Clinton’s face or make out anything she was saying. Every 30 seconds or so brought a new garble of desperate cross-screams. After a few minutes Clinton turned to go, walking toward a restricted area a few feet away. She ignored more shouts, thanked everyone and then, wearing a small and determined grin, slipped into a moving fortress of men with earpieces.‘‘You know,’’ I heard her saying to the person she was walking with on the other side of a curtain, ‘‘these shoes are a little clunky.’’Clinton’s ‘‘scars’’ and resiliency are clearly a point of defiant pride. Being someone who perseveres (in her campaigns, in her marriage, in her political fights) has always been central to her identity. She talked a lot about this late in the 2008 primaries, after it was clear that Obama would be the nominee and fellow Democrats were urging her to quit. Clinton seemed to settle at that point on a theme of toughness — the same ‘‘fighter’’ theme that the campaign keeps hammering home today.That was the gist, stretched over 45 minutes, of her kickoff speech on Roosevelt Island in New York in June. The inaugural rally was supposed to take place in May, but the campaign put it off. The drafting of her address was described to me as a free-for-all, if not a fiasco. Numerous co-authors from inside and outside the campaign were called in from the various shadow governments of Hillarylands past and present. There were alums from the Bill Clinton White House and the Hillary Clinton State Department (Lissa Muscatine was enlisted) and veterans of Obama World (the president’s former speechwriter Jon Favreau was asked to pitch in), along with a far-flung network of friends and advisers and satellites. Clinton was deeply involved in collating the policies and issues she would touch on, but has never been known for soaring rhetoric — or, for that matter, inspirational slogans. ‘‘She tends to resist starting out with a message and working back to a program,’’ said John Podesta, a longtime friend and adviser who is serving as chairman of the campaign. Podesta told me that Clinton prefers to hone her policy positions and develop her program, and let the message flow from there.No one would expect Clinton to meet her husband’s impossible standard as communicator, or Obama’s as speech-giver, but the kickoff address came off more as a hodgepodge than a call to action. It also had an oddly throwback feel, evoking New Deal liberalism (at Roosevelt Island) and traditional Democratic themes, and was delivered by someone who has been part of our political scenery for a quarter-century. ‘‘America can’t succeed unless you succeed,’’ Clinton said in the speech’s banner passage. ‘‘That’s why I’m running for president of the United States.’’ (About that line, The Atlantic’s Molly Ball wrote: ‘‘Clinton’s entire candidacy, it seemed, was built around a non sequitur.’’)Some commentators remarked that the speech, with a workmanlike, laundry-list feel, was reminiscent of a State of the Union address. That comparison, when applied to a speech by a nonpresident, suggests a sense of inevitability that no campaign wants to project. But the Clinton team has a strong notion of its advantages — that the candidate, whose election would be historic, is an overwhelming front-runner. Her top challenger, Senator Bernie Sanders, of Vermont, has been drawing impressive crowds and cash, but his eventual support probably has the ceiling you would expect from a 73-year-old avowed socialist. Republicans, for their part, are in the throes of a primary battle royale (14 candidates and counting) that is laying bare the many ideological fissures within the party; whoever prevails will confront a continuing demographic shift in favor of voters likely to opt for Democratic nominees (as they have, in terms of the popular vote, in five of the last six national elections).Clinton’s enterprise has a grind-it-out quality reminiscent of Obama’s re-election strategy of 2012: cover your base, attack often. Her team will emphasize data, targeting and field operations — all specialties Mook sharpened as a wunderkind state director for Clinton in 2008 and in subsequent statewide and congressional races. Ground troops will identify supporters and make sure they vote, without giving much thought to persuading swing voters. In nearly every campaign event, the candidate catalogs all the fights she has waged on their ‘‘everyday American’’ behalf. That’s as close as there comes to a big idea in this expedition. To fight is a skill, and it creates a spectacle, but it hardly constitutes a vision. Nor is it a particularly fresh theme for Democratic presidential candidates, who have been trumpeting their ‘‘I’ll fight for you’’ credentials for decades (the future lobbyist Richard Gephardt used to punctuate his labor-heavy rallies with an impassioned ‘‘It’s your fight too!’’).Clinton often says at her events that her campaign is ‘‘not about me.’’ All politicians say that (even though, of course, it is about them). But she is right in that she stands for bigger things, not least among them the goal of electing a woman as president. Her sex gives the campaign a built-in point of connection, and compared with what she did in 2008, Clinton has not hesitated to emphasize the factor known euphemistically as ‘‘the historic nature of her candidacy.’’‘‘I love that she is a woman — that’s a huge deal for me,’’ Mary Lee Sargent, a retired community-college professor from Bow, N.H., told me. I met Sargent at a rally Clinton held a few days after her kickoff event, at an orchard near Concord. Sargent said she was no great Hillary fan. ‘‘I have no illusion that she would change Washington,’’ she told me, adding that she would vote for Sanders in the primary but Clinton in the general election. It would be great, she reiterated, ‘‘to have a woman in there.’’There are plainly concerns within the Hillary camp about an ‘‘enthusiasm gap,’’ especially given the recent crowds, money and attention Sanders has been drawing. When I asked Mook about the challenge of keeping Clinton supporters excited, given how familiar the candidate is and the glide path she appears to have to the nomination, he became defensive. ‘‘I take issue with the excitement question,’’ he told me, noting that they have ‘‘more social media activity than any other candidate.’’ He added, again, ‘‘I take issue with the premise of your question.’’Mook projects a confidence belying his age and the stresses of his job. As the campaign manager, he sits in the bull’s-eye within the many circles of insanity that ring Planet Clintonia. (Actually, Mook does not sit, as his office is equipped with a standing desk.) What impressed me was how he dispatched my question about reconciling the divide between the candidate’s cautious persona and the private ‘‘Hillary I know’’ that her disciples swear by. ‘‘What I worry about is us getting up in our heads too much and trying to manufacture one thing or another,’’ he told me. ‘‘My priority is letting her take her time to get out there, let the voters see who she is, rather than some Wizard of Oz.’’In early July, after much back and forth with the campaign and reluctance on my part, I decided to take the campaign up on its offer of an off-the-record conversation with Clinton. I figured I would use the opportunity at Bretton Woods to ask Clinton directly for an interview or at least to let me do part of our conversation on the record. She chose the latter. The setup was consistent with a general sense pervading this campaign that Clinton is stepping very carefully. It was also, for better or worse, who Hillary Clinton is. She is true to herself that way, I suppose. The recent fashion of candidates fetishizing their willingness to let it rip and ‘‘tell it like it is’’ can be a cheap and tiresome pose, too, even if journalists find it more congenial to their purposes.I mentioned to Clinton how extraordinary it must be to be a de facto standard-bearer for a party that keeps scoring landmark progressive victories. Supreme Court rulings in favor of same-sex marriage and the Affordable Care Act would seem to encourage a feel-good moment for the Democratic base. The degree to which these triumphs will accrue to Clinton is unclear, especially because she did not support same-sex marriage until 2013 and oversaw a disastrous attempt at a health care bill in her husband’s White House. But in Clinton’s retelling, it should be enough that she has been part of the fights themselves. (She has a knack for extolling her credentials in terms of simply being present: in the Situation Room during the Bin Laden raid, in 112 countries as your secretary of state, as a senator from New York on 9/11.)Even as she intends to enjoy a culture-war victory lap, she is strapped in for the perpetual battle that defines her public life and rhetoric. ‘‘Winning the culture wars is not enough,’’ she told me. ‘‘It’s never final. There’s always the rear-guard actions.’’ Her fondness for such combat metaphors underscores her reluctance to lower her defenses. ‘‘You just have to sort of accept that and keep fighting and moving forward.’’After our meeting at Bretton Woods, I followed Clinton to a house party in Glen, about a half-hour’s drive away. The setting was idyllic New Hampshire: the candidate standing on a big deck, fog rising from green mountains behind her. A bullfrog croaked from a pond while Clinton recounted the story of her mother — a staple of this campaign that in previous years she kept largely private.Dorothy Rodham, who lived with her daughter in her later years until she died in 2011 at 92, had a Dicken­sian childhood in which she was abandoned and neglected by a series of awful relatives. At age 8, she and her sister were put unattended on a train from Illinois to California to live with abusive grandparents; at 14, she took a job as a $3-a-week housekeeper, cook and nanny. It is a standard trick in politics for politicians to borrow stories of hardship from their ancestors, especially when they themselves enjoyed comfortable upbringings. But this particular act of adversity-theft is a powerful device for Clinton, the kind of story you can hear a thousand times and still get a knot in your stomach over. She talked in Glen about the small kindnesses extended to her mother, the little gestures that made all the difference: the women whose home she cleaned who allowed her to go to school; the teacher who brought extra food for lunch so Dorothy could eat.Her mother’s ordeal might be the most powerful part of Clinton’s stump speech. It also has the makings of a message that resonates much more deeply than Clinton’s ‘‘I’m a fighter’’ bit. She describes her mother as a consummate child of adversity whose resiliency was nurtured through the kindness of strangers. There are worse parables on which to build connections with voters.Clinton spoke for almost an hour. She looked as at ease as I had seen her so far in this campaign and seemed as if she didn’t want to leave. The Fourth of July reminded her of being a girl scout, she said, of holding the flag and marching in parades.She finally left to march in one about a half-hour away, in the town of Gorham. Clinton kept a smile affixed, and waved to well-wishers, but this was no Girl Scouts parade. A determined group of hecklers stalked her down Route 2. One held a Benghazi sign with letters that dripped blood. They kept up through the parade route (‘‘What about the emails?’’ ‘‘You’re a LIAR’’) while supporters tried to outshout the catcallers. The result was a charged and noisy scene. Clinton smiled and waved in defiance. ‘‘I’m having a great time,’’ she exclaimed to a reporter as more shouts resounded (‘‘You’re a CARPETBAGGER!’’).At that point, campaign officials unfurled a fat white rope to corral the media at a safe distance. The sight of Clinton aides wrangling reporters like cattle (so dehumanizing!) was of course photographed, tweeted and sent viral. That image became the day’s takeaway, at least in the national media: proof, supposedly, of Clinton’s running scared from the ‘‘tough questions,’’ thwarting press freedom on this day of our independence.The walk lasted about 30 minutes and, by parade’s end, felt like a different unofficial kickoff, this one to a long, long trudge.‘‘You know,’’ Clinton said, heading off to a diner, ‘‘I love parades.’’