Justice Anthony Kennedy’s majority opinion in today’s momentous 5-to-4 Supreme Court decision bringing marriage equality to every state in the country shows that he likes to let his pen soar: “Changed understandings of marriage are characteristic of a Nation where new dimensions of freedom become apparent to new generations,” he writes, adding that it “demeans gays and lesbians for the State to lock them out of a central institution of the Nation’s society.”The question, of course, is whether it is the court’s job to usher them into it. The Times Op-Ed columnist Ross Douthat and I discussed the justices’ role as problem-solvers Thursday, in relation to the court’s ruling on Obamacare. I don’t think it was an act of judicial activism to continue the national availability of the law’s subsidies for health insurance. The court didn’t strike down an act of Congress. It simply looked to Congress’s purpose — a method of statutory interpretation of fine lineage, as the Georgetown law professor Marty Lederman explains. If Congress thinks the court got it wrong, Congress can pass a provision tomorrow restricting the subsidies. That won’t happen, because subsidies for some, not all, was never the plan of the Affordable Care Act.But doubters of Friday’s same-sex marriage ruling are on stronger ground today in accusing the court of overreach and activism. “The right to marry is fundamental as a matter of history and tradition, but rights come not from ancient sources alone,” Kennedy writes. “They rise, too, from a better informed understanding of how constitutional imperatives define a liberty that remains urgent in our own era.” True — but how does this work in practice, and what are the limits?Kennedy has some precedent on his side: most powerfully, Loving v. Virginia, the 1967 ruling in which the court overturned state interracial-marriage bans. But he still has to explain why the court isn’t waiting for same-sex marriage to spread across the country through legislation and voter initiatives. “Indeed, it is most often through democracy that liberty is preserved and protected in our lives,” Kennedy acknowledges. The dissenting justices — all four of whom wrote opinions — hammer this point home.The majority justifies bypassing the democratic process because “individuals who are harmed need not await legislative action before asserting a fundamental right.” Kennedy brings in Bowers v. Hardwick, a 1986 ruling in which the court refused to strike down state sodomy bans, and points out that “men and women suffered pain and humiliation” in the 17 years that decision remained on the books, before it was overturned in Lawrence v. Texas.Denying the rights and benefits of marriage to gay people certainly also causes real harm. Kennedy invokes the plights of the plaintiffs before the court: “James Obergefell now asks whether Ohio can erase his marriage to John Arthur for all time. April DeBoer and Jayne Rowse now ask whether Michigan may continue to deny them the certainty and stability all mothers desire to protect their children, and for them and their children the childhood years will pass all too soon.” Does this mean the court should give itself the power to declare same-sex marriage throughout the land? Friday’s ruling overturns bans in more than half the states. (The laws remain in effect in only 14 or so states, but that’s only because the Supreme Court has allowed the lower federal courts to order the granting of marriage licenses to begin.) The ruling is not humble or modest or restrained. The court has newly recognized a fundamental right, significantly expanding the Constitution’s guarantees of liberty and equality. It has embraced an evolving, progressive understanding of the country’s foundational document.The dissenters are clear and thorough about the downsides of this. Chief Justice John Roberts asks sarcastically of his colleagues, “Just who do we think we are?” He also makes this sensible pitch for judicial restraint: “When decisions are reached through democratic means, some people will inevitably be disappointed with the results. But those whose views do not prevail at least know that they have had their say, and accordingly are — in the tradition of our political culture — reconciled to the result of a fair and honest debate.”Roberts warns that “stealing this issue from the people will for many cast a cloud over same-sex marriage, making a dramatic social change that much more difficult to accept.” Justice Samuel Alito goes further, predicting that today’s ruling “will be used to vilify Americans who are unwilling to assent to the new orthodoxy” and “exploited by those who are determined to stamp out every vestige of dissent.” He ends on a note of doom: “Recalling the harsh treatment of gays and lesbians in the past, some may think that turnabout is fair play. But if that sentiment prevails, the Nation will experience bitter and lasting wounds.”Among gay rights supporters, these doubts will be drowned out in celebration — as Roberts, for one, acknowledges. Perhaps some activists would quietly agree that state-by-state lawmaking would be better. But the evidence to date suggests that Alito’s dire warning is overblown; the backlash to same-sex marriage has so far been contained to minor skirmishes. There are no victims when gay couples marry. The gain, in love, commitment and stability, is easy to see. These are among the reasons public opinion has moved swiftly in favor of marriage equality.As we go forward, the debate between the two sides of the court over how to make social change comes down to trust. Do we trust the justices and their successors to use the key the majority took out today to unlock other doors, carefully and sparingly? Not even the justices themselves would claim that the court’s judgment has been infallible, or even close to it. In his dissent, Roberts brings up the court’s worst constitutional errors: decisions that entrenched slavery and set back workers’ rights. In my view, he could have added his own court’s Citizens United ruling to the list.But on a day that is glorious for so many people, let’s hope for a better future. The justices aren’t entirely removed from the democratic process, after all. The composition of the courts depends on the president and Senate we choose to elect. Over time, voters have a say in the kind of justice the court dispenses. The odds are good that most of them will think the court got this one right.