In a roughly 45-minute speech on Saturday, Hillary Rodham Clinton made 14 references to herself as a fighter.She said she would “fight” back against Republicans, “fight” climate change, “fight” to “strengthen America’s families” and “fight” to “harness all of America’s power.” She used the verb in many of the same ways at her first major rally in Des Moines on Sunday, adding that she would “fight” for Midwestern values.The presidential campaign’s effort to define Mrs. Clinton as a fighter is, on the surface, a way to persuade middle-class voters that she is on their side. But it is also helping to convey a more subtle message: When it comes to political combat and perseverance, Mrs. Clinton is not President Obama.The theme is emerging just as Mr. Obama has suffered a major setback on trade, one that many in Congress say reflects his weaknesses, namely his standoffishness and his inability to forge coalitions for an agenda.During her campaign swing in Iowa on Sunday, Mrs. Clinton said no one would be a “tougher negotiator” on trade than she would. She offered her most explicit remarks yet on the president’s handling of the issue, challenging him to work with Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the minority leader, and other congressional Democrats to improve the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal.“My view is the White House should call Nancy and a few other of the Democrats to say, ‘What would it take to get an agreement that would be better and not worse for American workers?’” Mrs. Clinton said.She added: “What I want to see is a concerted effort to see how far we can push the agreement.”In the early months of her campaign, Mrs. Clinton has worked to highlight her connection to, and respect for, the president she served for four years as secretary of state. She has appealed to Mr. Obama’s coalition of young and African-American voters with sweeping speeches on voting rights and civil rights. And even as liberal Democrats urged her to speak out against Mr. Obama’s troubled trade deal, Mrs. Clinton had for the most part remained mum.But now that Democrats in Congress have rebuffed Mr. Obama in a public and embarrassing way, Mrs. Clinton faces heightened pressure to present herself to voters as a different kind of leader, in style if not in substance.At the same time, Clinton aides believe that if they can make the “tenacious fighter” image stick with voters, “ultimately she will win this election,” the campaign manager, Robby Mook, said Friday at a question-and-answer session hosted by Politico.A new biographical video from the campaign, titled “Fighter,” opens with a silhouette of Mrs. Clinton as a voice says: “What is a fighter? To me, a fighter is someone who won’t give up.”Persistence is another emphasis. In the video and on the stump, Mrs. Clinton talks about her unsuccessful attempt to overhaul the health care system as first lady and how she continued to work and eventually got the Children’s Health Insurance Program passed.The inevitable contrast with Mr. Obama’s leadership style that such language draws is not lost on Democrats in early nominating states.“Her years in Arkansas, as first lady, as a losing candidate in 2008 and as secretary of state — all of that taught her to be tough and to keep on going,” said Marti Anderson, an Iowa state representative who has a 2008 Obama campaign sticker on the front door of her Des Moines home.“Obama’s quiet, a studious person, a wonk, a constitutional lawyer. Hillary is more of an activist,” Mrs. Anderson said. “And you need an activist when you have, for instance, a Congress that puts obstacles in your way. An activist doesn’t stop trying.”Mrs. Clinton’s efforts to draw a contrast must be subtle, lest she alienate the Democratic base of voters who supported Mr. Obama. When asked whether the positioning of Mrs. Clinton is a strategy to distance her from Mr. Obama, a campaign spokesman reiterated that she is a “tenacious, dogged fighter” and that the description would be “front and center” in the campaign.It helps that she has also earned a public image of not giving up, said Kiki McLean, a former aide to Mrs. Clinton.“It’s her Methodist Midwestern stick-to-itiveness,” Ms. McLean said. “I don’t think it’s a strategic adoption” to contrast her with Mr. Obama, she added, “but they are definitely different personalities.”At her speech in New York on Saturday, the biggest rally of her presidential campaign, Mrs. Clinton said she was devoting her candidacy to “everyone who’s ever been knocked down but refused to be knocked out.” Kelly Clarkson’s “Stronger (What Doesn’t Kill You)” blared from the outdoor speakers.After the speech, supporters seemed happy to have seen Mrs. Clinton showcase her own temperament and style. They could not help but compare them with those of the sitting president.“What you can see today and what you can see all the time is that Hillary loves people,” Lynn Forester de Rothschild, a prominent backer of Democrats and Mrs. Clinton, said. “And even people who really like Barack Obama have said to me that is not the case with him.”Those differences were apparent to some of the Iowans who helped catapult Mr. Obama to victory in the 2008 caucuses.On Saturday night, the Clinton campaign organized a house party at Mrs. Anderson’s home in the Beaverdale neighborhood, which some Democrats nicknamed “Obamadale” during the 2008 caucuses because of the strong support there for Mr. Obama. Several attendees said they were attracted to Mrs. Clinton’s doggedness after having been disappointed by Mr. Obama’s occasional lack of gumption.“I think Hillary knows how to fight, and she certainly saw how to deal with Republicans when Bill Clinton was in the White House,” said Jay Peterson, a librarian for the State of Iowa who backed Mr. Obama in the 2008 caucuses.A spokesman for the White House declined to comment, though Mr. Obama’s supporters point out that he has been criticized for being too combative, especially on issues like immigration and health care.The Clinton campaign decided early on not to distance itself from the Obama administration; instead, Mrs. Clinton often praises the economic progress Mr. Obama has made. On Saturday, she said Mr. Obama had brought the country “back from the brink of depression,” but“we face new challenges in our economy and our democracy.”At the same time, polls show a growing frustration not just with Mr. Obama but also with Congress and Washington generally, indicating that Mrs. Clinton must convince voters she can bring something fresh to the White House.Just 32 percent of Americans said they would prefer a presidential candidate whose political experience was mostly in the government in Washington, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll released May 5.“The issue isn’t that Washington isn’t fighting. The issue is that people feel like there’s no one in Washington fighting for them,” said Guy Cecil, a co-chairman of Priorities USA Action, the pro-Clinton “super PAC.”Mrs. Clinton’s message adds to the heat felt by Mr. Obama at a time when he is struggling to save his trade bill and avoid being incapacitated by his lame-duck status.Bob Meddaugh, an activist who supported Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. in the 2008 caucuses and then embraced Mr. Obama, is hopeful that Mrs. Clinton can be more successful in building coalitions.“I think she may be a little more direct and confrontational with individual people, compared to the way the president has been more standoffish with Republicans and even some Democrats,” he said.