Relished by some mayors and resented by others, the ritual has endured for decades in New York’s City Hall: an open and unscripted question-and-answer session between the mayor and the press.Under Mayor Bill de Blasio, the ritual has turned into a rarity.The mayoral scrum has increasingly been shunned by Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, as he confronts drooping poll numbers and a run of rough headlines. Since the end of August, he has held one such session on average per week, according to a review of his schedule, a sharp drop-off from predecessors who entertained queries on a near-daily basis.While the mayor does hold news conferences, he frequently limits questions to a predetermined topic. The shift has not gone unnoticed: The New York Press Club has publicly objected to it, and reporters have started to ignore the restrictions.On Friday, amid the growing revolt, Mr. de Blasio convened a lengthy news conference at City Hall during which he declared himself “absolutely comfortable” with the change in practice.“We don’t approach government the way others approached it; it’s a blunt truth,” Mr. de Blasio said. “There are assumptions that some of my predecessors have that I just don’t have, about how we do this work, what our obligations are to the people.”“I have a job to do,” he added. “Much more important than giving the answers to the questions is actually doing the work.”Few high-profile politicians face the same expectation of accessibility as the mayor of New York; Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, also a Democrat, takes questions from reporters far less frequently, for instance.But Mr. de Blasio, who pledged a new era of transparency when he took office last year, has appeared uneasy since taking office with the uncontrolled, and sometimes adversarial, nature of open news conferences.“Media access to the mayor has become a time-honored tradition that’s important to the functioning of democracy in the City of New York,” said Representative Hakeem Jeffries, a Democrat from Brooklyn. “The approach taken by Mayor de Blasio certainly appears to be a novel one in recent history, and one that perhaps should be re-examined in the best interests of the people that he represents.”Rudolph W. Giuliani relished such sessions and the opportunity for engagement they offered. Michael R. Bloomberg seemed to tolerate them. Until the end of August, when his poll numbers fell, Mr. de Blasio had more or less followed the pattern of past mayors, taking queries from the press corps two or three times a week.Asked on Friday about the dwindling number of news conferences, the mayor said that in the past, he had been focused on enacting major new policy initiatives; he was now eager to bring his message “to the people.”“There’s going to be a lot of information flowing,” Mr. de Blasio said, pledging to communicate through a variety of channels, including the brief radio appearances he has done more often of late. (His advisers are aware that those interviews tend to be shorter and breezier than the interrogations Mr. de Blasio can face from the regular City Hall reporters.)The mayor also pledged on Friday to hold more town hall-style events, although, so far, only one has been convened, and many of the attendees were invited by his allies. “We’re going to change this paradigm,” Mr. de Blasio said, “because we think there are better ways to communicate and better ways to be connected to the people.”Tensions with the media are nothing new for Mr. de Blasio, and allies say he remains deeply frustrated with the press coverage he has gotten, convinced that some news outlets are set on sinking his mayoralty. He has accused the New York City press corps of treating his predecessor, Mr. Bloomberg, with “kid gloves.”In recent days, Mr. de Blasio has also raised concerns with his aides about leaks, frustrated that details of his private conversations have turned up in news reports, according to several people told of the discussions who requested anonymity to describe private conversations.The mayor’s team is sensitive to accusations that he is less than transparent, particularly after a week that included an on-air altercation between a CBS reporter and Mr. de Blasio’s press secretary, and a report in DNAinfo about the administration’s sluggishness in responding to Freedom of Information requests.The mayor convened his news conference on Friday after widespread objections to his lack of accessibility for questions. He fielded queries for more than an hour, addressing topics ranging from homelessness to crime to traffic safety. Afterward, his press office emailed a note to reporters saying that Mr. de Blasio had given “well over 100 interviews” and more than 200 open-ended question-and-answer sessions since taking office.Mr. de Blasio has tried to make light of reporters’ complaints, although his jokes sometimes fall flat. This week, at a news conference in Brooklyn to announce a policy promoting industrial growth, he chastised journalists for not asking more questions about the subject.“All right now, press corps,” Mr. de Blasio said. “We’re spending over 100 million new dollars and we’re creating 20,000 jobs. Surely that must be of some interest.”When he moved to the so-called off-topic portion of the event — when he fields questions on any subject — Mr. de Blasio gave a lopsided smile upon seeing the journalists’ raised hands.“Aw, look,” he said. “Like flowers blooming.”