Dozens of Finnish nationalists, including a man dressed like a member of the Ku Klux Klan, hurled rocks and fireworks at a bus filled with Iraqis seeking asylum in Finland on Thursday night, the state broadcaster YLE reported.Reporters in Lahti, about 60 miles north of the capital, Helsinki, recorded video of the bus being pelted with flares and smoke bombs as it arrived at a former army barracks being used as a reception center.
            Näin lahtelaishyypiöt ottivat vastaan ekan pakolaisten bussin. #Hennala #Lahti pic.twitter.com/35rKV7s9al Journalists at the barracks noted that the first migrants off the bus were families with young children.
            Ensimmäisenä bussista astuu ulos nuori äiti nukkuva lapsi sylissään. Isä tulee perässä. #hennala pic.twitter.com/fEHROpnPkF The words “Go home” were also scrawled on the pavement outside the barracks.
            Mielenosoittajien jättämä kirjoitus #hennala 'n portille #lahti #turvapaikanhakijat pic.twitter.com/6GGZSWhq0l Before the bus arrived, the crowd of about three dozen protesters also threw rocks at Finnish Red Cross volunteers waiting to welcome the asylum seekers.In another part of Finland, the police arrested a man for throwing a Molotov cocktail at an emergency shelter for migrants. No injuries were reported and the fire was extinguished.Finland’s three-party coalition government said in a statement on Friday that it “strongly condemns last night’s racist protests against asylum seekers.”Despite ideological differences, Prime Minister Juha Sipila, Finance Minister Alexander Stubb and Foreign Minister Timo Soini, who lead Finland’s three largest parties, urged their supporters to accept that “Finland is an international, open and tolerant country where the majority accept migrants.”Images of the faux Klansman, carrying Finland’s flag in one hand and a megaphone in the other, prompted a wave of outrage from Finns on the opposite side of the political spectrum.
            This is a national embarassment for #Finland. KKK & Finnish flag protesting against refugees. #rasismi #Lahti #KKK pic.twitter.com/fIHbxywZPk 
            Pieni joukko mielenosoittajia odottaa turvapaikanhakijoiden saapumista Hennalan kasarmin portilla Lahdessa. pic.twitter.com/deq6IkYxtv Several commenters on social media reworked the image into humorous and pointed memes. One blogger used the man in the white sheet as a stand-in for Mr. Soini, whose populist party, the second largest in Finland’s Parliament, includes members fiercely opposed to immigration.
            piffiltä #kaikkienaikojenhallitus pic.twitter.com/27OGHS7B0S 
            "We dont want any muslims here to stone us. So we will stone Red Cross employees" #lahti #racism pic.twitter.com/Ek9MCtC5II 
#Hennala #Lahti #Suomi2015 pic.twitter.com/zvdCKinO7g 
            Logot. #lahti pic.twitter.com/feRHlgUNsV 
            From #Finland to the #world & #refugeeswelcome -The bad people are minority! pic.twitter.com/F2EaX0vQKT “There is nothing good about this picture,” Mr. Soini told YLE. “The Ku Klux Klan is a racist and misanthropic organization. Linking the Finnish flag with it is disgusting.”The attack on the bus was also condemned by Lahti’s city council leaders. “Open democracy tolerates opposing opinions and leaves no place for hate speech, vandalism, provocation or harassment,” they wrote in a statement shared on social networks.
            We hope those seeking asylum in #Lahti will encounter kindness and safety in the future. Leaders condemn racism. http://t.co/KSMUUR0CT5 Nearly 15,000 migrants, mostly from Iraq, have arrived in Finland this year, according to statistics posted online on Friday by Mika Niikko, a member of Parliament from Mr. Soini’s nationalist True Finns party.Mr. Niikko, who has warned about “the Islamization of Europe,” condemned the government’s decision last week to welcome another 2,400 asylum-seekers, calling it, “a Christmas gift for human traffickers and refugees.”Two weeks ago, Finns who take the opposite view of immigration staged an open-air festival in Helsinki, under the banner #SuomiSaysWelcome, using the Finnish word for Finland.
            Dancing for freedom, solidarity and peace. ❤️ #suomisayswelcome #refugeeswelcome #EuropeSaysWelcome pic.twitter.com/XUcXnJuQ2V 
            Välkommen, det finns ännu rum på torget! #suomisayswelcome #EuropeSaysWelcome pic.twitter.com/U22WnHILqL 
            El festival de "tervetuloa Suomeen " welcome refugees"en Helsinki . pic.twitter.com/q2wewGp2Op Finland’s national police commissioner, Seppo Kolehmainen, said in a statement that his force “unequivocally condemns the racist acts,” and appealed for “patience and understanding” to allow time for his officers to investigate the actions of the protesters and the legitimacy of the asylum claims by the migrants.