ALBANY —  Its reputation may have been battered by scandal, convictions and periodic crisis, but the New York State Senate has one thing going for it over Albany’s often similarly beleaguered State Assembly: a new website.The “fresh and interactive” design of the site, nysenate.gov, sharply contrasts with the old Senate design — and the current Assembly site — which served as a more nuts-and-bolts resource. In overhauling the Senate site, designers said they were trying to make the website more accessible not only for constituents but also for the senators, who are often besieged by questions and concerns from voters, delivered via phone calls, letters and taps on the shoulder during public events.To that end, the redesign, which took two years to create and cost about $525,000, includes a “Legislation” function, which allows visitors to monitor the progress and receive status updates on bills sponsored by individual senators. They can also register their opinions in the old-timey “aye” or “nay” usually heard in senatorial proceedings (or conversations with pirates), and they can affix comments to those “ayes” and “nays.”The opinions are then transmitted to the senators’ private web pages, allowing them to track public sentiment, even as they sit in chambers listening to debate or, in theory, checking their phones for the latest tally of constituent consensus.Started in the wee hours of Tuesday morning, the new site was promptly hailed by Senator John J. Flanagan, the Long Island Republican who is the majority leader, as a giant step forward for a chamber that has recently lagged behind in technological advances.“This groundbreaking tool for democracy will get New Yorkers more involved and more invested in all aspects of their state government and will change the way we serve them for the better,” Mr. Flanagan said in a statement. “I am proud that the New York State Senate is leading the way.”Visitors can also sign up to follow specific issues, a wide-ranging list including topics such as crime and another ever-popular topic in Albany, dogs. Designers said they would be monitoring the site for possible signs of user abuse, like signing up for more than one account. (A quick field test suggested that creating multiple accounts was rather easy to do.)Government watchdog groups praised the new site, saying it was a vast improvement for a legislature that has a way to go to fixing its reputation with voters. Indeed, John Kaehny, the executive director of Reinvent Albany, which campaigns for government transparency, commended the site’s navigability and “mobile-first” design and said it was “the best legislative website in the U.S. right now.”“We’re always happy to say nice things about innovation and basic competency in government and here’s a little seed of innovation and competency in the State Senate,” Mr. Kaehny said. “It’s a job well done by what’s normally seen as the most dysfunctional state government in America.”