Western universities and private philanthropists have poured resources into China in recent years, funding scholarships, campuses and other initiatives to bridge the gap between East and West.Now, the Berggruen Institute, an independent research group based in Santa Monica, Calif., has announced its own initiative, focused not on economics or history or politics, but on something seemingly more esoteric: philosophy.The Berggruen Philosophy and Culture Center, to be announced on Wednesday, will include a fellowship program between Chinese and American universities; an “ideas contest,” co-sponsored by the Aspen Institute; and an annual $1 million philosophy prize awarded by an international jury.The center’s larger purpose, its founder, the billionaire investor Nicolas Berggruen, said in an interview, is to look past contemporary political differences to their deeper intellectual roots.“We want to have an impact in a world that is becoming more and more fractured culturally and politically,” Mr. Berggruen, 54, said. “It’s so clear that different political traditions really come from different cultures, from different views of the world, which in the end have to do with philosophy, with religion, with thinking in general.”Mr. Berggruen, who has dual German and American citizenship and whose personal fortune has been estimated at more than $2 billion, brings deep pockets to the project, though neither the Berggruen Institute nor the philosophy center has a permanent endowment. Both, he said, are currently funded out of a private charitable trust.The philosophy center is run out of the broader institute, established in 2010 by Mr. Berggruen, the founder of Berggruen Holdings, a private investment firm. Since its creation, the institute has funded ambitious — some might say quixotic — policy projects in the United States and abroad, including efforts to reform California’s state government  and to address youth unemployment in Europe.In addition to his wealth, Mr. Berggruen has a golden Rolodex. The Berggruen Institute’s 21st Century Council lists Google’s executive chairman, Eric Schmidt; Nicolas Sarkozy, former president of France; the economist Joseph Stiglitz; and Arianna Huffington among its members. (Mr. Berggruen and Ms. Huffington are founders of The World Post news and opinion site.)In November 2013, the council held a meeting with the senior leadership of China, including President Xi Jinping. Mr. Xi, Mr. Berggruen recalled, began the meeting by citing China’s 5,000-year-old culture.“He started the whole discussion not with short-term political or policy issues,” Mr. Berggruen said, “but by sort of saying: ‘Listen, before we have a relationship, you have to understand who we are. We have to start with understanding and respect for very different views of the world.’ ”Bridging conflicting views, Mr. Berggruen said, is at the core of the center’s mission. “We want to find solutions, not just underline differences,” he said. “We want to come up with new ideas.”The ideas contest and the $1 million prize, which are both expected to start next year, may grab the most public attention. But the core of the center is its fellowship program, which will send scholars from around the world to an American or British university for a year, followed by a year at Tsinghua University and at Peking University, both in Beijing. (This year’s inaugural class of eight fellows, which includes the former Taiwanese prime minister Jiang Yi-Huah, a political scientist by training, had its first seminar over the weekend at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford, the first American partner institution.)The fellows’ research will focus on six topics identified by the center through a series of meetings with leading scholars, including the relationship between democracy and meritocracy, between the ideals of harmony and freedom, and between equality and hierarchy.“Freedom is so central to the United States, harmony to China,” said Daniel A. Bell, a Canadian political scientist at Tsinghua who is serving as the Berggruen philosophy center’s director.“But what is the relationship between the two?” Mr. Bell said. “There’s little good work out there that explores that in a systematic way.”Mr. Bell’s own work arguing that China has evolved from a dictatorship to a kind of “political meritocracy” that may outperform Western democracy has generated sometimes fierce debate.Kwame Anthony Appiah, a professor of philosophy and law at New York University and a member of the Berggruen center’s academic board and prize jury, said that while he was “not ecumenical” about the Chinese government’s notion that “democracy is a bad idea,” it was important for Westerners to better grasp the underpinnings of its appeals to Confucian order.“Instead of just seeing this as cynical, one should try to understand what’s going on,” Mr. Appiah said. “Then we can discuss whether their applications of it are wise and just.”Similarly, he said, while the notion that misunderstandings between societies are rooted in philosophical differences is itself debatable, it is “a hypothesis worth investigating,” especially when supported by someone as well connected as Mr. Berggruen.“If anything useful comes out of it, he can put it on the agenda for important people who might be able to actually do something,” Mr. Appiah said.He added with a laugh: “That really is different from most philosophical enterprises.”