CIBITOKE, Burundi — Despite widespread international condemnation, bitter opposition within his own country and the threat of violent revolt, President Pierre Nkurunziza struck a defiant tone at a campaign rally Friday on a mountaintop near where government forces recently battled rebels.“The attempt of armed groups to destabilize the country did not last as long as the morning dew,” he said in his speech in Cibitoke, a province in the northwest near the border with Rwanda, citing the governing party’s victory in parliamentary elections as proof of widespread support, though the opposition boycotted the vote.“The people in all the provinces, all the counties, all the hills and all the fields, went to vote,” he said. “You have done well. And now tell each other what is ahead and that you will have to do even more.”A wave of protests and political violence followed Mr. Nkurunziza’s announcement in April that he would run for a third term despite the Constitution’s two-term limit.He contends that because he was first elected indirectly by lawmakers in 2005, that first term should not count toward the limit.Under pressure from regional and Western leaders seeking to avoid greater turmoil, Burundi’s government postponed the presidential election twice. It is now scheduled for Tuesday, and Mr. Nkurunziza made it clear on Friday that there would be no further delays.Friday’s event had all the hallmarks of a political rally, with balloons, banners, posters and music. A group of women sang songs praising the governing party, the National Council for the Defense of Democracy — Forces for the Defense of Democracy, known as CNDD-FDD.But it was not a campaign event in any traditional sense.One song mocked Gen. Godefroid Niyombare, who fled the country after leading an unsuccessful coup in May.“We want CNDD-FDD to search for Niyombare,” the women sang. “We want our government to arrest him.”Members of the governing party repeatedly invoked the June parliamentary elections as proof that they were acting on the will of the people, but this month United Nations observers issued a report saying the elections were not credible.“Episodes of violence and explosions preceded, and in some cases accompanied election day activities, mostly in Bujumbura,” the capital, the report said.International concern has been growing ever since Mr. Nkurunziza announced his intention to run again in April. The United States and other governments have said that Mr. Nkurunziza’s decision was a violation of the Arusha peace accords, which ended more than a decade of war that left about 300,000 Burundians dead.On Thursday, the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights urged the Security Council to take action to prevent violence related to Burundi’s political crisis, which has left dozens dead and forced more than 145,000 people to flee the country. “The international community must not simply stand by and wait for mass atrocities to unfold, thereby risking a major conflict of regional proportions before it finally decides to act,” the statement said.But Mr. Nkurunziza said Friday that the opposition had convinced the world of a big lie.What they did not understand, he told the crowd in Cibitoke, was that he was not running because he wanted to stay in office.“It was you, the people, who asked me to run,” he said. “I did not deny you. I accepted because it was you, the people, who asked.”Ezechiel Nibigira, a party loyalist, said he was confident that the president could lead the country through this crisis. “He is really, truly a wonderful man,” Mr. Nibigira said.While there are large pockets of opposition to Mr. Nkurunziza in the capital, both he and his party have deep support in many parts of the country.Still, he traveled to Cibitoke not because it is one of his strongholds, but to send a clear message that he will not be cowed.The government claimed this week that the army had recently killed more than 30 rebels in clashes in the hills of Cibitoke and Kayanza Provinces. Officials said dozens more were taken prisoner, and the captives were then paraded before cameras. But it was impossible to verify whether the men in custody were actually militia fighters.Canesius Ndayimanisha, governor of northern Kayanza Province, said that people believed to be rebels carried out two attacks after entering the country through the dense Nyungwe Forest on the border with Rwanda.The implication of his statement was that Rwanda was fomenting trouble.Rwanda’s foreign minister, Louise Mushikiwabo, quickly denounced the governor’s remarks, saying that Burundi found it “convenient to find responsibility elsewhere.”The episode illustrated how problems in this country can quickly draw in its neighbors, who are also still recovering from years of war.All around the rally were signs and symbols that recalled bitter days from Burundi’s past.The symbol of the governing party is an eagle holding a sword and a cassava plant. During the war, the cassava was all many could find to eat when they fled into the bush.Many men wore CNDD-FDD shirts emblazoned with the word abagumyabanga, which means those who can keep a secret. That is a prized quality when no one knows who might be an enemy.Members of the youth wing of the party, some of whom have been accused of working with the security forces to intimidate the opposition, are known as the Imbonerakure. While it literally means “those who see far,” the name also arose during the war, a reference to children who were sent to scout in the forest to see if the enemy was lurking.At the rally in Cibitoke and at a rally the day before in the capital of Bujumbura, most in attendance were young people and members of the Imbonerakure.In his speech, Mr. Nkurunziza frequently invoked the war, a clash between ethnic groups that continued from 1993 to 2005.“For the first time since our independence, we have had 10 years without war,” he said. “Today we have peace. And during the coming five years, we will stand firm for peace and security.”Then, surrounded by a phalanx of heavily armed soldiers and the army lining the road for miles, the president departed.