Abigail Sage Bellows and Rabbi Owen Anders Gottlieb are to be married Sunday morning at Adat Shalom Reconstructionist Congregation in Bethesda, Md. Rabbi Daniel Siegel is to perform the ceremony, with his wife, Rabbi Hanna Tiferet Siegel, participating.The bride, 31, who is keeping her name, is a special assistant to the under secretary for civilian security, democracy and human rights at the State Department in Washington. She supports initiatives on governmental accountability and anticorruption. She graduated with highest distinction from the University of Virginia and received a master’s degree in public policy from Harvard.She is a daughter of Bracha P. Laster of Vienna, Va., and Randy I. Bellows of Fairfax, Va., and a stepdaughter of Rebeca H. Bellows and John L. Laster. Her father is a judge in the Circuit Court of Fairfax County in Fairfax. Her mother is a professor of literacy education at Towson University in Towson, Md.The groom, 42, is an assistant professor in the School of Interactive Games and Media at the Rochester Institute of Technology. He is the founder of the Initiative in Religion, Culture and Policy focusing on original design and field research in games and simulation at the institute’s Magic Center, a research laboratory and production center. He is also the director of ConverJent: Jewish Games for Learning, a nonprofit group that uses game design as a form of study of Jewish culture, history and sacred texts.He graduated summa cum laude from Dartmouth and received a master’s in cinema-television from what is now the U.S.C. School of Cinematic Arts, as well as a Master of Hebrew Letters and rabbinical ordination from Hebrew Union College in New York. He received a Ph.D. in education and Jewish studies from New York University.He is a son of Carol A. Gottlieb of Park Ridge, N.J., and the late Harvey I. Gottlieb. The groom's mother is a teacher of English as a second language in the public schools in Wood-Ridge School District in New Jersey. His father was the owner of M. Gottlieb & Son Prime Meats in New York.Their mutual friend Rabbi Nicole Luna set them up in 2008 while Ms. Bellows lived in Manhattan and Rabbi Gottlieb lived in Brooklyn.