In a result befitting politically polarized Wisconsin, voters on Tuesday re-elected a State Supreme Court justice seen as liberal, but passed a constitutional amendment that will most likely lead to the installation of a conservative chief justice.Justice Ann Walsh Bradley handily defeated Judge James Daley of Rock County and conservatives who wanted to increase their majority on the officially nonpartisan court, The Associated Press reported. The vote on the amendment was closer.Both issues captured significant donor interest and further exposed the state’s bitter political divides, which have spread beyond the governor’s mansion and Legislature and prompted reports of dysfunction and partisan discord on the Supreme Court.“I think today represents the latest step in trying to make this court more accountable to politics and less accountable to law,” said Bert Brandenburg, the executive director of Justice at Stake, a group that tracks spending in judicial races and opposed the Wisconsin amendment. “No matter what party you’re from, as a Supreme Court justice, you’re feeling more pressure, and you have to look over your shoulder more and more.”Conservatives generally lined up in favor of the constitutional amendment, which proposed having members of the court vote for the chief justice, rather than automatically installing the longest-serving judge in that position. The practical effect will most likely be the demotion of Chief Justice Shirley S. Abrahamson, 81, who has served on the court since 1976 and is viewed as part of its liberal minority.The court’s composition has garnered more interest in recent years as judges have decided a series of politically charged cases. Justices are now preparing to decide whether an investigation can proceed into the possible coordination in 2011 and 2012 between the campaign of Gov. Scott Walker and outside conservative groups. Justice Bradley, who won re-election on Tuesday, has recused herself from the case. Mr. Walker, a Republican, is flirting with a run for president in 2016.Proponents said having judges vote for the chief justice would be a more democratic approach, and supportive outside groups bought television advertisements promoting that view. But liberals and some government watchdog groups came out against the measure.“People walking into the voting booth might not know what’s behind it, that it’s a vendetta against Chief Justice Shirley Abrahamson,” said Matthew Rothschild, the executive director of the Wisconsin Democracy Campaign, a group that monitors campaigns in the state and came out against the amendment.In many ways, the question about who will lead the Supreme Court overshadowed the race for who will serve on the court. But even without the high-drama campaigning seen in some recent Supreme Court elections in Wisconsin, Justice Bradley and her opponent, Judge Daley, took turns calling each other partisans beholden to political interests as they both portrayed themselves as reformers.Republican groups in the state donated to the campaign of Judge Daley, a former prosecutor who serves on the Rock County Circuit Court and describes himself as a “conservative jurist.” Judge Daley railed in his campaign against the “liberal” policies of Justice Bradley, who was seeking her third term on the Supreme Court and said she wanted to limit the influence of outside groups on the judiciary.Justice Bradley said she would not accept donations from political parties, but her campaign did take money from labor unions and several prominent Democrats. Though both candidates continued to report donations into the election’s final days, the race did not attract the widespread outside spending seen in some recent Wisconsin Supreme Court races. Those outside donors seemed more focused on the proposed constitutional amendment.Wisconsin Supreme Court justices do not run as members of political parties, but the judges’ ideological leanings are clear. Four members are considered conservative, while three are seen as liberal, including Justice Bradley and Chief Justice Abrahamson.