ALBANY —  An eclectic group of liberal and conservative interests and individuals filed suit on Tuesday against the State Board of Elections, seeking to overturn a two-decade-old decision that critics say has unleashed an unending torrent of money into New York politics.The suit, filed in State Supreme Court in Albany, is just the latest attempt to address the so-called L.L.C. loophole, which was created by a 1996 opinion by the Board of Elections. It found that limited-liability companies should be treated like individuals, and thus allowed to donate up to $60,800 to a statewide candidate per election cycle.That logic has long galled government watchdog groups like the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University School of Law, which helped file the suit against the board. Critics contend that the loophole allows donors, like real estate developers, to use multiple limited-liability companies to make huge contributions to candidates.“An L.L.C. is a classic ‘legal fiction’ created by state law; it bears virtually none of the characteristics of individual people acting in the political arena,” reads the 30-page suit, drafted by the Brennan Center and the Manhattan firm Emery Celli Brinckerhoff & Abady. “An L.L.C. cannot vote. It holds no political views separate from those of its ‘members.’ And it has none of the ‘associational rights’ of the sort that individuals routinely exercise in the world of politics.”The suit seeks to invalidate a recent vote by the Board of Elections’ four commissioners, who deadlocked 2 to 2 in April on whether to rescind the 1996 rule and force the commission to issue a new opinion. That vote split along party lines, with two Democratic commissioners voting to overturn the rule and two Republicans voting to uphold it.Lawrence Norden, the deputy director of the Brennan Center’s Democracy Program, said the 1996 rule was a “clear misinterpretation” of the state’s campaign finance laws.“It defies common sense,” Mr. Norden said, adding that money flowing through the limited-liability companies, which are easy to establish and often anonymous, “have come to completely undermine the system.”And the problem has gotten worse as years have passed. “It has really gone from a trickle to a tidal wave,” he said.John Conklin, a spokesman for the Board of Elections, said its lawyers were reviewing the suit.The L.L.C. loophole has been the target of criticism from a variety of individuals and entities, including the state attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, and the Commission to Investigate Public Corruption, which Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo created in 2013 to look at the state’s chronic corruption problems.Before being suddenly disbanded by Mr. Cuomo in March 2014, the commission had been deeply troubled by the loophole, seeing it as a gaping hole in the campaign-finance system.Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, has received robust contributions from limited-liability companies, though he has said he supports closing the loophole. But the governor did not make its closing a priority during this year’s legislative session, which ended last month, arguing in February that it would have a difficult time passing a divided Legislature, where Democrats control the Assembly and Republicans control the Senate.State Senator Daniel L. Squadron knows all too well about such resistance, having tried an array of legislative maneuvers in recent years to close the loophole.“The impact is unlimited anonymous dollars flooding our state political system,” said Mr. Squadron, a Democrat who is one of the six individuals named as plaintiffs.Mr. Squadron, who represents Lower Manhattan and parts of Brooklyn, has been thwarted in his legislative attempts in the State Senate by that chamber’s Republican majority, but said that the issue should be bipartisan.That sentiment was echoed by another plaintiff, Maureen Koetz, a Republican who lost a bid to unseat Assemblyman Sheldon Silver, a longtime Lower East Side Democrat, in 2014. Mr. Silver was indicted this year on federal corruption charges and forced to resign as speaker of the Assembly.Ms. Koetz, a former acting assistant secretary of the United States Air Force, said she had been moved to join the case after being shocked by the influence of money in New York’s electoral process.“Having spent many years in federal service, I’ve only recently come to the New York system,” Ms. Koetz said. “And I’m impressed by the level of corruption that the system is capable of.”