Lani Guinier, the first tenured woman of color at Harvard Law School, went through a trial by fire in 1993, when President Bill Clinton withdrew her nomination for assistant attorney general for civil rights.Negative publicity about her political and academic views had made her a polarizing figure. Conservatives called her “the quota queen,” though her essays, published in “The Tyranny of the Majority: Fundamental Fairness in Representative Democracy,” make it clear she opposed quotas and was seeking voting systems that would promote representation not just of the majority but also of a greater range of groups.Her new book, “The Tyranny of Meritocracy: Democratizing Higher Education in America,” returns to the theme of inclusion, making the case that college admissions has become a “testocracy” in which standardized test scores are seen as the most important measure of merit, and character counts for little. She argues for a rethinking of merit that would better reflect the values of a democratic society.Where did the term “meritocracy” come from? It was coined by a British sociologist, Michael Young, in a 1958 satire, “The Rise of Meritocracy, 1870-2033,” which imagined an elite that got its position not from ancestry, but from test scores and effort. For him, meritocracy was a negative term; his spoof was a warning about the negative consequences of assigning social status based on formal educational qualifications, and showed how excluding from leadership anyone who couldn’t jump through the educational hoops would create a new form of discrimination. And that’s exactly what has happened.What’s the problem with relying so heavily on test scores?The score on your SATs or other exams is a better predictor of your parents’ income and the car they drive than of your performance in college. The credentials of our testocracy legitimize a new elite, and give them an inflated sense of their worth. They believe that they are entitled to power because they got it through their individual merit. Our testocratic meritocracy has let those already at the top of the heap rule, and keep their power, without any sense of moral or political accountability.What happens when they’re actually in college? In 2009, when I went to my son’s graduation from Yale, I looked at the profile of his class, by the numbers in the student newspaper. What was upsetting was that every one of the statistics it gave — SAT scores, the percentage of applicants admitted, number of students whose parents were alumni — had been established before the students even got to New Haven. There was no mention of anything they had achieved in the four years of their Yale College experience, or what they had learned about leadership for a democratic society. We need to move beyond thinking about admission and think more about mission.Is there anything you find encouraging in what’s been happening in higher education?There have been some very interesting peer-learning developments. When Uri Treisman was at Berkeley — he’s now at the University of Texas — he saw that African-American students were not doing as well in his calculus class as Asian-Americans, and he was concerned.He hired people to follow the students with a camera for several months, to witness how they were studying. The assumption among his colleagues followed the well-known stereotypes, that the black students were not as well prepared and not spending as much time on their homework. But he found something different, that they studied in their dorm rooms by themselves, while the Chinese-Americans studied together, talking about their calculus problems while they cooked and ate their meals.Many of the African-Americans had adopted isolation as a strategy for coping with their environment. Professor Treisman started a program to help them mirror what the Chinese students were doing. He invited them to lunch, and when they talked through calculus problems, he discovered that, in some ways, they were better at teaching each other calculus than he was. They could give more useful examples to map out how to solve a problem.Working together, their grades improved dramatically.At Harvard, in the context of physics and women, Eric Mazur had the same experience when he had his students work through questions together instead of listening to him lecture.Because of those results, a lot of professors have changed how they teach, to have less lecture time and more peer learning.A lot of people believe in diversity as a way of ensuring fairness. But you make a different argument for bringing together diverse groups of students.Diversity is not simply a matter of having people who look different sitting next to each other but learning in the same way. What I’m trying to introduce into the conversation is the power of collaboration, of bringing together people who bring different kinds of skills to solving a problem. That diversity can empower creative ways of learning.Studies show that groups made up of the highest-performing individuals are not as good at solving complex multidimensional problems — like designing environmental policies, cracking codes or creating social welfare systems — as groups with a mix of skills, backgrounds and ways of thinking, even if the individuals in the group are not all high performers. That’s important, since this world has a lot of complex problems we need to solve.