Among the new watches vying for attention Thursday as Baselworld, the international watch fair, opens its doors will be Slim d’Hermès.It is the first new collection of watches for men and women in more than a decade from La Montre Hermès, the luxury house’s watchmaking division, and the first to appear from its creative director, Philippe Delhotal, who joined the company from Patek Philippe in 2009, and it is considered the culmination of a long-term strategy to establish Hermès as a credible maker of mechanical Swiss watches.Hermès is not alone in its approach. A handful of top-level luxury and jewelry brands — such as Louis Vuitton, Chanel, Bulgari and Cartier — have been reinforcing their commitments to horology, even though this blaze of activity is at odds with the financial reality.For example, at the end of 2014, Hermès Group reported an 11 percent sales increase, and growth in 13 of its 14 sectors. The 14th, watches, declined 11 percent.“Let’s be honest, the watch industry was difficult last year, but we know why,” said Mr. Delhotal, citing the Chinese government’s clampdown on corporate gifting and the decline in sales during Hong Kong’s democracy protests.Yet he remains positive about a turnaround in watch sales overall and he stressed that Hermès’ transition to high-end watchmaking was still in its early stages. “The beginning of this year seems to being going well, and we hope that 2015 is the year that we recover,” he said. “We are convinced that the potential exists — and we have the trust of the Hermès family; they are helping us to achieve what we need to achieve.”Since 2006, the company has spent time and money acquiring factories and component manufacturers in Switzerland’s watchmaking heartland, including the case manufacturer Joseph Erard, the dial factory Natéber and the movement manufacturer Vaucher Manufacture Fleurier, as well as establishing the strap atelier LMH Leather.(The acquisitions have ensured that the showpiece 39.5 mm-diameter Slim d’Hermès will be almost entirely created inhouse, the first Hermès watch with that distinction. The exceptions will be the hands and the buckle.)And in December, Hermès introduced a training program to help its staff members sell watches like the Slim, which will retail in three sizes and several choices of styles for 2,300 euros to 28,500 euros, or $2,574 to $31,895.“This will help us sell more complicated watches, not just accessories watches. You can’t sell a watch like a Birkin bag,” Mr. Delhotal said. “It’s important for the customer to understand that the product that he sees and buys — whether a bag or a watch — is fully in-house to have confidence in the Hermès brand.”As competition at the top end of watchmaking increases, Luca Solca, head of luxury goods research at the investment company Exane BNP Paribas, said investing in brand credibility is essential to growing and retaining market share.“In commercial terms, investing in fine watchmaking brings nothing or close to nothing for these brands,” he said. “If you were focused on building bottom line results, you would go into the market the way, like Gucci for example, and sell logoed watches at accessible price points.”For these brands, he continued, “it’s about building brand equity, and through this you build a better opportunity to sell at aspirational luxury price points, which is the bread and butter of these luxury companies. It ultimately increases the quality perception of the brand.”Mr. Solca acknowledges that, with time, it is possible to make inroads.“Cartier is now one of the most important players in the watch space, and on the same level as watch brands like Rolex or Omega. There is no reason why in 20 or 30 years brands like Hermès, Tiffany or Bulgari, if they are developed in the right way, could potentially pose a similar threat,” he said. “But it takes a long-term commitment and consistency to establish yourself as a true specialist.”Digital Luxury Group Intelligence, which tracks consumer interest by tallying online searches, has found that while interest in couture brands (including Bulgari, Cartier, Chanel, Chaumet, Chopard, Dior, Harry Winston, Hermès, Louis Vuitton, Piaget, Ralph Lauren, Tiffany and Van Cleef & Arpels) increased 4 percent from 2013 to 2014, that was significantly less than the 23 percent increase in searches for niche haute horlogerie brands (including Audemars Piguet, Franck Muller, Jaeger-LeCoultre, Patek Philippe and Vacheron Constantin).“In the information age, luxury consumers are more and more looking for a genuine brand that provides a unique product,” said Jean Christophe Babin, who became chief executive at Bulgari in 2013 after 10 years at Tag Heuer. “It can’t be just about the look. You have to have expertise and the authenticity to back it up so that there is consistency with your history and DNA.”Mr. Delhotal acknowledged that targeting a luxury customer creates its own challenges: “When you buy a Patek Philippe, it’s about the high watchmaking but when you buy a Hermès watch, you expect a watch that represents the aesthetics and métiers of the Hermès universe — and high watchmaking.“In fact,” he concluded, “nowadays my job is twice as hard!" Recent watch-related activities at some luxury and jewelry houses:Bulgari The jewelry and watch house has been making most of its own movements since mid-2013, when Jean Christophe Babin became chief executive after 10 years at Tag Heuer. The Lvcea, its new women’s watch introduced last year, was called a sober departure for a brand that has been known for its glitzy jewelry watches.CartierIn January, it unveiled Rotonde de Cartier Grande Complication, the most complicated watch it has ever made, and Clé de Cartier (13,000 euros to 140,000 euros, or $14,000 to $151,000), its first new watch design in eight years. An established player in this category, Cartier now makes 29 movements in house and has made major investments in haute horlogerie since Stanislas de Quercize arrived as its chief executive in January 2013.ChanelIts iconic ceramic J12 watches have been produced entirely in house since 2008, when it doubled the size of its factory in La-Chaux-de-Fonds, France.ChaumetThe jewelry and watch house has introduced Class One, its first diving watch, which the house describes as an “unusual combination of diamonds and rubber.” It includes a limited 300-piece edition by the Berlin-based artist Loris Checchini.Louis Vuitton The fashion giant, which has been making watches only since 2002, opened a 43,000-square-foot manufacturing facility in Geneva in October. Hamdi Chatti, LV’s head of watches and jewelry, described La Fabrique du Temps as “a milestone,” and it significantly increases the company’s capacity to make its own movements.Ralph LaurenThis spring Luc Perramond, previously at Tag Heuer and chief executive at La Montre Hermès, will take control of the fashion house’s watch division, with the goal of elevating its watchmaking credentials.