LONGWOOD, Fla. —  The first Republican presidential debate is just over a week away, but one could have easily concluded on Monday that Jeb Bush was sounding out themes for a face-off against Hillary Rodham Clinton.Mr. Bush, the former governor of Florida, memorably said last year that a Republican candidate had to be willing to lose the primary to win the general election. And over a day of campaigning in the Orlando area, he often sounded as if he were keynoting a centrist think-tank seminar about how to overcome political polarization more than a Republican attempting to win over conservatives.“We need men and women of good will forging consensus, starting to solve problems, kind of building back the muscles of consensus, compromise and solution-finding to fix these things,” Mr. Bush told a group of businesspeople here, lamenting what he called a paralyzed democracy. “Apparently that is dangerous in a Republican primary,” he added, “but it’s what I believe.”The overriding issue facing the next president, Mr. Bush argued, is finding “a way to reweave the web of civility” before progress on substantive issues can be made. “That is going to be first, second, third, fourth priority because everything falls into place once you get that done,” he said at a pastors’ luncheon.His call for high-mindedness had an implicit target: Donald J. Trump, whose harsh words about Mexican immigrants, Senator John McCain, and rival candidates including Mr. Bush himself have not impeded his rise to the top of Republican polls.But Mr. Bush’s presence on some of the hardest-fought terrain in the country’s pre-eminent swing state, also made a statement: The Florida primary in March may well prove crucial, but he is eyeing a broader constituency.Speaking before a racially diverse group of pastors, Mr. Bush recounted his electoral strength among Hispanics as governor and mocked the idea of “outreach,” an oft-used term in Republican politics to describe appealing to minorities, as something that sounded too peripheral for his taste.“I cannot imagine having the same kind of numbers that Republican candidates have had in past presidential elections,” Mr. Bush. “I’m pretty confident that we can do better.”That was not his only implicit jab at previous Republican standard-bearers. At the pastors’ luncheon, he invoked Mitt Romney’s formulation about how to confront immigration. “The idea of self-deportation or rounding people up is not an American value,” he said.Afterward, he reproached former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas, who over the weekend invoked the Holocaust to attack President Obama over the Iran nuclear agreement, saying it would march Israelis “to the door of the oven.”“The use of that kind of language is just wrong,” Mr. Bush told reporters. “This is not the way we’re going to win elections, and that’s not how we’re going to solve problems.”Later, taking questions from the business group, came a more subtle, but just as revealing, correction of Mr. Trump and his alarmism about Mexican immigrants. The central difficulty America has now with the southern border, Mr. Bush noted, is in how to control migration from Central America — not Mexico.“When Trump goes to the border and says all this stuff,” Mr. Bush said, trailing off with evident weariness. “The flow of immigrants into our country is dramatically different now,” he explained.At every stop Monday, Mr. Bush had a barely-veiled message for voters about his foil: I am not Trump, or some other resentment-driven politician.Or, as Mr. Bush put it: “I’m not a grievance candidate.”Concluding his day before a largely white crowd in Maitland, he said it even more directly: “We shouldn’t be scolding people, we shouldn’t say outrageous things that turn people off to the conservative message. Our message is the one of hope and opportunity for everybody.”