WASHINGTON —  As meetings among congressional colleagues go, the one last month in which Republican senators confronted Mike Lee, a freshman from Utah, was among the most contentious in years.A member of Mr. Lee’s Senate staff had sent an email to a conservative group urging its leaders to pressure fellow Republicans to support another high-stakes procedural tactic to try to defund President Obama’s health care law, a move that Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, had counseled against.The message so provoked Mr. McConnell that he gave a copy of the email to Republican colleagues at an emergency meeting, then let them loose to attack Mr. Lee, whose efforts to gut the health care law two years ago helped lead to a politically toxic government shutdown.Mr. Lee’s colleagues called him selfish and a bully, and said he was endangering their party, according to members who were there. Abashed, Mr. Lee agreed to stand down.A few days later, Mr. Lee was working with Senator Amy Klobuchar, a liberal Democrat from Minnesota, to plan hearings on the consolidation of the health insurance industry, one of many efforts on the Judiciary Committee where Mr. Lee is gaining his legislative chops — and a reputation for working with Democrats.“We are able to work together really well,” she said. “It’s been a lot of fun, in addition to being really productive.”In a Congress more known for its predictable partisan lanes, Mr. Lee is trying an unusual straddle.As lawmakers confront a deadline over spending that threatens another government shutdown next month, Mr. Lee faces a stark choice: Will he continue defying Republican leaders who are trying to demonstrate their ability to govern, or will he instead focus on building a legacy of serious libertarian-leaning policy, with the help of Democrats?“He was elected by and large by the Tea Party, and he does owe them a great deal of gratitude,” said Orrin G. Hatch, the senior Republican senator from Utah. “But sooner or later he’s going to have to think these things through.”Few things annoy Democrats more than attacks on the health law and threats to shut down the government, two of Mr. Lee’s signature moves. Yet Mr. Lee, who upset Senator Robert F. Bennett in 2010 to become the Tea Party’s first victor in a major primary, has found himself aligning with liberal Democrats over Republicans on issues like privacy, criminal justice overhaul and oversight of big business.“I have him on speed dial,” said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont.Mr. Lee co-sponsored, with Mr. Leahy, a bill that curtailed the government’s surveillance powers under the Patriot Act, again opposing Mr. McConnell. He is working with Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, on a broad overhaul of sentencing laws. And he and Ms. Klobuchar are examining several corporate mergers for possible antitrust problems.“I really enjoy those great bipartisan moments,” Mr. Lee said in an interview in his office on Capitol Hill.Yet many in his own party see Mr. Lee as at best a lackey for outside agitators and at worst a threat to their efforts to take back the White House.After fighting with the Republican leadership, dragging out legislation like the multibillion-dollar transportation bill and walking around the Rotunda with Senator Ted Cruz of Texas while lecturing colleagues about the Constitution, Mr. Lee’s relationship with many Republicans is frosty.During a dispute over the government’s borrowing limit, Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, suggested on the Senate floor that Mr. Lee “ought to learn a little bit more about how business is done in the Congress of the United States.”Mr. Lee, 44, may have run for the Senate as an alternative to Washington business as usual, but his life has been steeped in Beltway sensibilities.His father, Rex Edwin Lee, was an assistant United States attorney general during the Ford administration and a solicitor general under President Ronald Reagan. In his youth, Mr. Lee split time between Utah, where he was born, and McLean, Va., where among his neighbors and classmates were the children of senators and other Washington power brokers.He graduated from Brigham Young University — he took off two years to serve his Mormon mission in Texas — and earned his law degree there in 1997. He was a clerk for Samuel A. Alito Jr., the Supreme Court justice, who was then on an appellate court. Mr. Lee was an assistant United States attorney in Salt Lake City and later a clerk for Justice Alito on the Supreme Court.After a few years in private practice, Mr. Lee saw his opening in 2009, when Mr. Bennett became a target for the incipient Tea Party because of his support for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the Bush administration’s $700 billion program to rescue the banking system. Mr. Lee’s victory in that primary was a harbinger for many older Republican senators who had grown comfortable in their seats.After arriving in the Senate, Mr. Lee quickly fell in with two other newly elected Republican senators, Mr. Cruz, elected in 2012, and Rand Paul of Kentucky, whose roots in constitutional law and libertarianism helped fuse the three into a force similar to the far-right conservative faction that had been troubling Speaker John A. Boehner in the House.In 2013, Mr. Lee worked closely with outside groups, including the Senate Conservatives Fund, a political action committee dedicated to “electing true conservatives,” to try to defund the health care law as part of a budget process. That led to the government shutdown that lasted more than two weeks.Mr. Lee’s standing among voters in Utah plummeted in the aftermath, although it rebounded over the next year, especially among Republican voters. “The key takeaway from our surveys is that Lee was damaged significantly, though temporarily, by the government shutdown,” said Christopher F. Karpowitz, a co-director of Brigham Young’s Center for the Study of Elections and Democracy.At that time, there was chatter in Utah about a possible challenger to Mr. Lee in a primary or even general election. But now, “nobody is looking at running against him” in 2016, said Dave Hansen, a former Republican Party chairman and political consultant in Utah. “There was a time when he was looked at as a follower of a couple of members, but now he is viewed as one of the leaders of the Republican Senate.”This year, Mr. Lee, again with the blessing of an outside conservative group, Heritage Action, stalled the passage of a bill to finance the Department of Homeland Security — this time over Mr. Obama’s executive order to prevent nearly five million immigrants from deportation. That fight, just after Republicans took control of the Senate, cost party leaders their chance to show an early united front against Democrats.Now, some Republicans are threatening to refuse to vote for a short-term measure to keep the government running unless Planned Parenthood loses its federal funding, a reaction to videos that show Planned Parenthood officials discussing fees for tissue from aborted fetuses.Mr. Lee, who has always voted against short-term measures to keep the government open — known as continuing resolutions — said he would probably stand with other renegade Republicans against a short-term funding bill backed by the Republican leadership right before a visit from Pope Francis at the end of September.The Utah Republican opposes Planned Parenthood, but says he would have voted against the temporary spending measure anyway. “Continuing resolutions are problematic for a number of reasons,” he said.The senator said he hoped to spend the next year working to further issues of personal and bipartisan interest — privacy, antitrust, criminal justice overhaul — but could not promise that he would always please his Republican colleagues.“This place moves very quickly,” Mr. Lee said. “I don’t spend a lot of time thinking about what I would do over.”