COLUMBIA, S.C. —  After decades of debate in South Carolina over the Confederate battle flag, it seemed the matter had been settled in July, when state officials stopped flying the flag on State House grounds and relegated it to a museum for “appropriate display.”Then came the price tag.This month, consultants for the South Carolina Confederate Relic Room and Military Museum here introduced a $5.3 million plan to expand the facility and show off the flag, along with an electronic display of the names of the state’s Civil War dead.That idea proved to be a bust among Democrats who view the flag as an affront to African-Americans, and among members of both parties who balked at the cost.“Irresponsible,” said Representative Mary E. Tinkler, Democrat of Charleston.“Absurd,” said Representative Christopher A. Corley, Republican of Graniteville.“It wouldn’t have cost anything to keep it where it was,” said Representative William M. Chumley, one of 20 Republicans in the South Carolina House, including Mr. Corley, who voted against moving the flag in the first place.Last week, the commission that oversees the museum reduced the cost to $3.6 million. But the plan is subject to approval by the legislature, and Tommy Pope, the House speaker pro tempore, said in an interview that he expected a vigorous debate as his fellow Republicans sought to balance spending concerns with what he called the heritage that the flag represents.The continuing debate illustrates a challenge that communities around the country are facing as Americans embark on a sweeping reconsideration of public symbols and memorials that many now find offensive. As these icons are relegated to the dustbin of history, someone usually needs to figure out how to manage the dustbin — and pay for it.For centuries, of course, conquering armies, revolutionaries and liberated peoples have done no such thing, preferring to pull down, melt or dismember memorials to toppled governments. But other models have emerged to preserve such memorials and recognize history while not extolling the ideas they embody.In Budapest, a tourist attraction called Memento Park has collected dozens of Soviet-era monuments to Communist titans like Lenin, Marx and Engels. “This park is about dictatorship,” the park’s designer, the architect Akos Eleod, is quoted as saying on its website. “And at the same time, because it can be talked about, described and built up, this park is about democracy.”Around the American South, somewhat similar strategies are emerging, particularly since the murder of nine African-American parishioners at Emanuel A.M.E. Church in Charleston in June prompted a movement to take down the symbols of the Confederacy. An avowed white supremacist is to stand trial in the shootings.At the University of Texas at Austin, a statue of Jefferson Davis, the president of the Confederacy, was removed from a place of prominence near the campus’s iconic tower building in August. After refurbishing, the statue will be displayed in a new historical exhibit space dedicated to “the role of symbolism, statuary and public memory in American history,” said Don Carleton, the executive director of the university’s Dolph Briscoe Center for American History.In New Orleans, a furor erupted on Dec. 17 when the City Council voted, 6 to 1, to remove four Confederate monuments from city streets, including a statue of Gen. Robert E. Lee in the center of a traffic circle named in his honor.“The Confederacy, you see, was on the wrong side of history and humanity,” Mayor Mitch Landrieu said.Private funds will cover the $170,000 cost of removing the statues, which will be stored in a warehouse for now. Mr. Landrieu has said he would like to see them eventually displayed in a park or museum that offered “a fuller context.”Hours after the vote, however, a number of historical groups filed a federal lawsuit seeking to stop the statues’ removal.South Carolina’s Confederate and military museum dates to 1896; since 2001, it has been housed in a reconfigured textile mill a few blocks from the State House. The exhibits celebrate the state’s martial history and make some effort to contextualize the collection of old weapons, photographs and curiosities, though often with a distinctive Southern twist: One display refers to the Civil War as the “War Between the States,” the name preferred by Confederate heritage groups.The museum is also full of Confederate battle flags that were used by South Carolinians during the war — unlike the flag that was removed from the State House. That makes the whole issue of honoring the State House flag in the museum particularly absurd to critics like Brad Warthen, a former editorial page editor at The State in Columbia, who now blogs about South Carolina politics.Mr. Warthen has noted that legislators, years ago, mandated that the flag be made of nylon, rather than cotton, to keep the colors from fading. He ridiculed this as ahistorical and “cheesy.” (One of his old columns began with altered lyrics to the song “Dixie”: “Oh, I wish I was in the land of nylon.”)Like many here, Mr. Warthen believes that spending millions to display the flag makes little sense in a state that is struggling to find funds for road and infrastructure repairs (much needed after catastrophic flooding in October), educational initiatives and changes to a scandal-plagued Department of Social Services.“Our state’s spending needs are legion,” he said. “It doesn’t really matter how you feel about the flag. It’s a ridiculous waste of resources.”The flag is also likely to be a source of bad blood when the legislature convenes in January. Ms. Tinkler, the Charleston Democrat, has introduced a bill that would allow the museum display to be paid for with private funds and grants.Mr. Corley, the Graniteville Republican, has denounced the legislation that brought the flag down as a “back-room deal.” A Christmas card that he sent to colleagues who had supported the bill featured a photo of the Confederate flag flying at the State House and a greeting that said, in part, “May you take this joyous time as an opportunity to ask forgiveness of all your sins, such as betrayal.”Mr. Corley has also filed his own bill to let residents vote in a “statewide advisory referendum” on whether the flag should be flown at the State House.As the debate over the flag lingers on, there are calls to remove other controversial symbols around the state. These include a Confederate flag at the chapel of the Citadel, the public military college, and a State House statue of “Pitchfork” Ben Tillman, a post-Reconstruction white supremacist politician.A state law puts the power to make such changes exclusively in the hands of the legislature. But soon after the flag vote in July, Representative Jay Lucas, the House speaker, determined that the best way to manage history’s dustbin, at least for the time being, was to keep the lid sealed tight. In a statement, Mr. Lucas said the House would “not engage in or debate the specifics of public monuments, memorials, state buildings, road names or any other historical markers.”