ISTANBUL —  Fighter jets raced across the Istanbul sky, painting the Turkish flag with ribbons of colored smoke, as a military band with nearly 600 musicians marched below. Hundreds of thousands of people looked on, in an event that quickly took on the fervor of a religiously infused political rally.The event being celebrated so lavishly last Saturday occurred 562 years ago, when the Ottomans conquered what was then called Constantinople. But its themes of conquest, piety and Ottoman nostalgia made the celebration a powerful metaphor, highlighting the triumphs and ambitions of one man: President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey.Never mind that when Turkish voters choose a new Parliament on Sunday, Mr. Erdogan will not be on the ballot. The election will still largely be a referendum on him, and on his plans to transform Turkey’s Constitution and concentrate more power in an executive presidency. A big victory would also represent a new milestone in Mr. Erdogan’s drive to eclipse Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the founder of modern Turkey, in the history books as the country’s pre-eminent figure.To many of his supporters, Mr. Erdogan already has.“I really just came here to show my support for Erdogan, my tall man,” said Fatma Sahin, 32, as she waved a white Erdogan flag at the rally. “He doesn’t just deserve the presidency, he deserves to be king.”Like much of what happens in Turkey, the election campaign was dominated by Mr. Erdogan’s outsize personality. Though the presidency is supposed to be a largely ceremonial post, removed from partisan politics, Mr. Erdogan campaigned aggressively for his Islamist Justice and Development Party, known by its Turkish initials, A.K.P.Mr. Erdogan’s power has seemed to grow in the presidency, as he consolidated his grip on the judiciary, tightened restrictions on the news media and moved into an immense new presidential palace. He has been compared to Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, who similarly dominated his country’s politics from both the offices of president and prime minister.At the rally on Saturday, Mr. Erdogan gave a characteristically passionate performance and almost instantly upstaged Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu. Though under the Constitution the prime minister is the country’s most powerful official, Mr. Davutoglu delivered only a short speech.Mr. Erdogan, on the other hand, spoke expansively about how Turkey had been transformed by his party’s 12-year tenure: upending the old secular order, empowering the religious masses and pushing the army from politics. “To reverse this nation’s ill fate for 12 years is a conquest,” Mr. Erdogan told the jubilant crowd. “To successfully pass this turning point on the way to a new Turkey is a conquest.”And then, referring to the coming elections, he added: “God willing, June 7 will be a conquest.”Mr. Erdogan was once lauded as a reformer for pushing for minority rights, peace with Turkey’s restive Kurds, an overhaul of the economy and membership in the European Union.But he has come under increasing criticism for what many describe as a turn toward authoritarian rule. His government has put increasing pressure on the news media and ordered the police to crack down aggressively on peaceful protesters. Judges and prosecutors who were followers of the Muslim cleric Fethullah Gulen, a former ally turned rival of Mr. Erdogan, have been removed and arrested. A series of contentious trials of senior officers has pushed the once-dominant military to the sidelines of politics.Critics say that Mr. Erdogan has been casting aside the secular system that Ataturk built in founding modern Turkey. They say Mr. Erdogan is replacing it with a government based on Islamist values that puts religion at the center of public life.Mr. Erdogan began his speech at the rally by reciting verses from the Quran, bringing tears to the eyes of many supporters. He challenged secular Turks who are uncomfortable with his government by saying, “We will not give way to those who speak out against our call to prayer,” and the audience responded with shouts of “Allahu akbar” — God is great.Opinion polls suggest that Mr. Erdogan’s party will easily win the most seats in Parliament on Sunday, but whether it will win enough seats to change the Constitution outright or to hold a constitutional referendum is too close to call.The polls indicate that the party’s support has slipped a bit from the last election in 2011, when it received almost half the vote. With economic growth slowing and many liberals who once backed Mr. Erdogan now critical of his authoritarian bent, support for his party is running in the range of 43 to 45 percent, on average.That has opened an opportunity for the People’s Democratic Party, a mainly Kurdish bloc known by the initials H.D.P. The party is running on a platform of greater democracy and women’s rights as well as its traditional pro-Kurdish agenda. The party has an energetic campaigner in a charismatic young leader, Selahattin Demirtas.Analysts say that if the H.D.P. can poll above the 10 percent threshold for gaining seats in Parliament, the governing party would probably be prevented from altering the Constitution to give more power to the president. Polls show support for the Kurdish party at close to 10 percent.“The H.D.P’s range of candidates has been very encouraging,” said Duygu Erdem, 27, a resident of Istanbul who works at an advertising agency. “We need more women, gays and other minorities to bring checks to Parliament’s stagnant Erdogan-loyalist majority.”Analysts say one plausible outcome is a bargain involving the two parties: Kurdish support for creating the strong presidential system, in exchange for greater rights for Kurds and a peace deal to end three decades of insurgency in the predominantly Kurdish southeast.Kurdish lawmakers who formerly ran as independents are taking a gamble this time by running on the H.D.P. slate. If the party clears the 10 percent hurdle, it will become a recognized bloc with influence in Parliament. But if it falls short, it will get no seats at all. Many voters are concerned that if that happens, Mr. Erdogan would have a free hand and the peace process with the Kurdish rebels would collapse.“I don’t see Erdogan as being committed to the peace process in any way,” said Svante E. Cornell, an expert on Turkey and an analyst and research director at the Central Asia-Caucasus Institute. “He is trying to maximize and centralize power and concentrate it in his own hands. A peace process would require the opposite of that.”In an effort to attract conservative Kurds away from the H.D.P. late in the campaign, Mr. Erdogan has held rallies in the southeast, sounding the religious themes that have been a hallmark of his career.“I was brought up with the Quran,” he told a crowd of Kurds in Diyarbakir, as he waved a Kurdish-language copy of the holy book. “I live my life by the Quran. We know what the place of the Quran is in your life.”The election campaign has been marred by violence, with bombings at the offices of the Kurdish party, and by plenty of vitriol, some of it directed at Mr. Erdogan’s new palace.When Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the leader of the main secular opposition party, claimed on Saturday that the palace featured gold-plated toilet seats, Mr. Erdogan invited him to inspect the bathrooms and vowed to resign if any golden toilet seats were found. Then, news agencies reported, he sued Mr. Kilicdaroglu for slander.