INTERNATIONALAn article on Sunday described skepticism and criticism over operations by the United States Agency for International Development in Pakistan.•In emails to the agency before publication, The Times asked about a specific lawsuit involving a former contractor with U.S.A.I.D. in Pakistan. But The Times did not inquire about the broader questions being raised in Pakistan as to the effectiveness of the agency’s operations, and so officials did not have a chance to respond to those concerns.•After the article was published, an official for the agency said the programs had created “dramatic improvements to energy access, education, health and democracy.” And State Department officials insisted that the agency had aggressively canceled underperforming programs and won reimbursement. Those responses were reflected in later versions of the article online.•In addition, initial versions of the article referred incorrectly to the agency’s response to The Times’s requests for comment on the lawsuit. The agency did not decline repeated requests for comment; rather, an official responded by email to say that it was agency policy not to discuss pending litigation. The official also noted that releases the agency had signed with the former contractor protected it from claims in such lawsuits.Corrections: September 16, 2015FRONT PAGEA picture caption with the continuation of an article on Sept. 9 about the fiscal problems facing Mayor Rahm Emanuel of Chicago misstated what the subject of the picture, Sarah Chambers, discussed during a town hall meeting. She voiced concerns about funding for special education, not teachers’ pay.NATIONALAn article on Saturday about the California Legislature’s approval of a measure to allow assisted suicides misidentified a European country that currently permits the practice. It is Switzerland, not Sweden.NEW YORKAn article on Tuesday about third-degree murder charges being brought against five students in the 2013 fraternity hazing death of a Baruch College student in Pennsylvania referred incompletely to action taken by the college in the wake of the episode. The college permanently banned the Pi Delta Psi fraternity; it did not merely suspend its rights on campus while conducting an investigation. The college also suspended all pledging activities for campus Greek Life organizations, not only those of Pi Delta Psi.OBITUARIESAn obituary on Monday about the political scientist and foreign-affairs analyst Stanley Hoffmann referred incorrectly to McGeorge Bundy, of whom Mr. Hoffman became a protégé when he was a visiting graduate student at Harvard’s government department in 1951. Mr. Bundy was a professor in the department, not its chairman. The obituary also misstated part of the name of the graduate school that is considered the gateway to a diplomatic career in France. It is the École Nationale d’Administration, not the École Normale d’Administration. And it misstated Mr. Hoffmann’s birth date. It was Nov. 27, 1928 — not Nov. 28.•An obituary on Monday about the playwright Frank D. Gilroy incorrectly characterized the reviews of the movie version of his best-known play, “The Subject Was Roses.” They were mostly positive; it is not the case that “the reviews were mediocre.”•An obituary on Wednesday about Andrew Kohut, the founding director of the Pew Research Center, misstated the surname of the center’s director of survey research. He is Scott Keeter, not Keeler.SPORTSAn article on Thursday about the women’s quarterfinals at the United States Open misstated, in some copies, the number of unforced errors Simona Halep had in her victory over Victoria Azarenka. It was 19, not 18.•An article on Aug. 30 about the 146th running of the Travers Stakes at Saratoga Race Course misstated, in some editions, the amount the winning horse, Keen Ice, earned for his owner, Donegal Racing. It was $850,000, not $670,000. The article also misspelled, in some copies, the given name of the winning jockey. He is Javier Castellano, not Javiar.•Because of an editing error, the Heisman Watch chart on Sept. 7 misspelled the given name of a Texas A&M defensive end who had two sacks and eight tackles against Arizona State in a football game on Sept. 5. He is Myles Garrett, not Miles.SCIENCE TIMESAn article on Tuesday about deep-sea exploration misstated the technology used to search the seafloor for a sunken submarine near Pearl Harbor. It is sonar, not radar.•A report in the In Brief column on Sept. 8 about children throwing out fruits and vegetables from their school lunches misstated how the researchers collected information about the school lunches and the rate at which students were throwing out the foods, which the Department of Agriculture requires to be part of the lunch program. The researchers took digital images of the lunches; they did not videotape the children choosing lunch. In addition, the researchers found that children were throwing out the required foods at a rate 56 percent higher than before the foods were required, not 35 percent higher.FOODA listing last Wednesday of the season’s restaurant openings misidentified the executive chef and owner at Sushi Seki. Those roles are held by Seki Shi — not by Edward Wijaya, who is the chef de cuisine. A listing for Kimoto Rooftop Beer Garden misstated the role of Brian Tsao. He is the chef, not an owner. The list also misstated the name of a new restaurant in the West Village and the background of one of its owners, Eli Kulp. The restaurant is High Street on Hudson, not High Street on Horatio, and Mr. Kulp joined the other owner, Ellen Yin, after she opened Fork in Philadelphia, not at its start. A listing for Indian Accent misidentified the source of soft-shell crabs. They are domestic; they are not imported from southern India. And a listing for Bedford & Co. omitted one restaurant in which the chef John DeLucie is a partner. Besides Bills Food & Drink, he is also a partner in the Lion.EDITORIALAn editorial about the police attack on James Blake misidentified Raymond Kelly, the former New York City police commissioner. He served under Mayors David Dinkins and Michael Bloomberg, not Rudolph Giuliani.The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.