CHICAGO — Asked to call a transgender boy by a male name he has chosen for himself, teachers and administrators around the country have leaned toward a simple response: Sure. Allow a high school student who was born male but identifies as female to join the volleyball team? Fine.But as transgender students assert themselves more, schools have hesitated at the locker room and the bathroom. Many have developed policies that require transgender students to use private changing and showering facilities, drawing opposition from these students, their parents and advocates who say the rules are discriminatory.The Education Department on Monday gave school officials at a suburban Chicago high school 30 days to resolve a dispute with a transgender student who identifies as a girl and has sought to change and shower in the girls’ locker room without restrictions; otherwise, the school risks forfeiting Title IX funding. The confrontation was an echo of battles nationwide, where the locker room and often the restroom are the stage for a fierce fight over how extensively transgender students should be accommodated.“I think it’s an issue that people are thinking about a lot,” said Thad Ballard, the president of the Elko County school board in northeast Nevada, which voted in September to keep transgender students out of bathrooms and locker rooms that correspond with their gender identity. He said the move was intended to preserve “the centuries-long tradition of respecting the difference in the sexes.”“When has it ever been appropriate for a biological boy or a biological girl to be in the opposite restroom of their gender?” Mr. Ballard said. “We’re all trying to think of the best way to protect the rights of all of our students, whether they’re transgender or not.”California, Washington, Colorado, Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York and the District of Columbia have already adopted policies requiring schools to permit transgender students to use bathrooms and locker rooms based on the student’s gender identity. In Maine, the State Supreme Court ruled last year that under the state’s antidiscrimination law, a transgender girl could use the bathrooms and locker rooms for the gender with which she identified.Eleven other states have general antidiscrimination policies on the books that might also protect the rights of transgender students in schools, said Michael D. Silverman, executive director of the Transgender Legal Defense and Education Fund.But some state legislatures are trying to move in the opposite direction. Republican lawmakers in Wisconsin have proposed a bill that would bar transgender students from using bathrooms that correspond with their gender identity, a measure that Democrats say is discriminatory. In Minnesota in April, the State Senate, dominated by Democrats, defeated a similar measure.In Houston on Tuesday, voters defeated a proposal that would have established nondiscrimination protections for gay and transgender residents. Supporters said the ordinance would have offered increased protections for gay and transgender people, as well as protections against discrimination based on sex, race, age and religion. Opponents said the proposal infringed on their religious beliefs, zeroing in on the protections it would have given for gender identity, particularly transgender Houstonians who were born male but identify as women.Some school districts have faced threats of legal action and federal intervention if they exclude transgender students from the bathroom that corresponds to their gender identity.In Arcadia, Calif., the school district entered a settlement agreement with the Department of Justice and the Education Department’s Office of Civil Rights after a transgender student who identifies as male brought a complaint about being forced to sleep in a separate camp cabin during a middle school science outing. District officials worked with federal officials to create a new policy that allows transgender students access to all sex-segregated facilities based on the gender with which they identify.David Vannasdall, superintendent of Arcadia, a school district with fewer than 10,000 students not far from downtown Los Angeles, said that in assigning the student to a separate cabin, the district had followed the advice of a lawyer who was anticipating the reactions of other parents rather than simply working with the family of the transgender student. “The problem is you have people making decisions from the basis of fear and the extremes, and that’s never good for kids,” Mr. Vannasdall said.In California, the State Legislature passed a law two years ago permitting transgender students to participate in sex-segregated activities and use facilities that were consistent with their gender identity in all schools. But opponents are mounting a plan to put an initiative on the California ballot next fall that would direct all students to use facilities that correspond with the gender on their birth certificates.“I am not questioning their sincerity,” said Karen England, spokeswoman for Privacy for All, a group that is promoting the ballot initiative in California. “But the reality of their biology is that their plumbing is quite different, and I have a right to privacy, and I have the right for my daughters and granddaughters to have the right to be in a bathroom or a locker room without being exposed to the opposite gender.”Jeff Johnston, an analyst at Focus on the Family, the conservative group based in Colorado, said in an email that “girls should not have to risk being exposed to boys in locker rooms, changing rooms and restrooms.”School officials say that in cases where parents or students raise concerns, they can work through them. In San Francisco, for example, a group of Muslim students sought permission last year to pray during break times and perform ritual cleansings in the bathrooms. But some of them were concerned that if a transgender student entered the bathroom at the same time, it would be inappropriate for the girls to share space with a biological male.“We talked about how this was a democracy and students have the right to go to the bathroom,” said Kevin R. Gogin, director of safety and wellness school health programs at the San Francisco Unified School District. After discussions with the religious students, he said, they agreed that they could seek privacy by using the private stalls for their cleansing rituals.In Los Angeles, where the district has had a policy allowing transgender students to use bathrooms and locker rooms according to their gender identity since 2004, Judy Chiasson, coordinator in the Human Relations, Diversity and Equity Department for the Los Angeles Unified School District, said that schools have had few complaints.“All of our students tend to be pretty modest,” Ms. Chiasson said. She added that unlike students in previous generations, even after physical education classes or athletic practices, students today do not tend to undress or shower in public facilities, and in bathrooms, students can use private stalls. Because of this, she said, in many cases, students do not even know whether another student is transgender or not.A transgender student does not want “to invade anybody else’s privacy,” Ms. Chiasson said. “She’s in the bathroom to do her business.”The school district in Palatine, Ill., that was reproached by the Education Department this week had required a transgender student to change her clothes and shower separately from other students, causing her family to raise the issue with federal officials. John Knight, director of the L.G.B.T. Project of the American Civil Liberties Union of Illinois, which represented her, said concerns over the presence of transgender students in locker rooms “is a made-up issue.”“The kids who are most vulnerable are the transgender students,” he said. “If a boy who’s transgender is comfortable to be in a boys’ restroom, he should be allowed to be there.”Catherine Lhamon, the Education Department’s assistant secretary for civil rights, said it is possible to protect the rights of all students without forcing transgender students to use different facilities.“The school’s responsibility is to respect who that person is,” Ms. Lhamon said. “And the school’s responsibility is that they do not teach discrimination, but do teach civic engagement along with the three R’s.”