Earlier this week, F.B.I. agents in New York arrested a 39-year-old Russian man named Evgeny Buryakov, whom federal prosecutors accused of participating in a spy ring gathering economic intelligence on the United States. There were three spies in all, according to the criminal complaint federal prosecutors filed on Monday, all agents of the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service (S.V.R.), who had been posing for several years as civilians. Buryakov worked at the New York branch of the Russian state-owned Vnesheconombank; his suspected accomplices worked as a Russian trade representative and diplomatic attaché.Buried in the prosecutors’ complaint is a claim that the defendants used a ‘‘Russian state-owned news organization’’ with reporters in the United States to solicit intelligence on U.S. financial markets. In a phone conversation recorded by the F.B.I., Igor Sporyshev, one of the defendants, asks Buryakov to help formulate questions to put in the mouth of a journalist for a Russian news outlet, who is apparently interviewing someone with privileged knowledge of the New York Stock Exchange. “[The news organization] wants very much, I don’t know how it came down from the top, but they need three questions with regard to the New York Exchange,” Sporyshev says. “What would be interesting to us? Can you help write something?”This kind of elaborate ploy to get eminently accessible information is nothing new in Russian spycraft. Anna Chapman and the other nine members of the S.V.R.’s Illegals Program arrested in 2010 were doing similarly rigorous, highly sensitive intelligence work: going to think-tank talks, reading newspapers and talking to locals in suburban New York and Washington. It’s an old intelligence trick, “sending public information through classified channels,” says Reuel Marc Gerecht, a former C.I.A. case officer in the Middle East and Europe and now a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies. “All intelligence sources do this because there isn’t enough classified information out there,” but “they still have to do something to justify their existence.” (For their part, the accused men seem to have been underwhelmed by their assignment; in a conversation the F.B.I. recorded, one complains that his work is “not even close” to what spies get to do in James Bond movies.)But I digress. Although neither the prospective interviewee nor the news organization is named in the complaint, The Washington Post reported on Tuesday that the latter was the Russian state-owned news wire Tass, which often served as a cover for K.G.B. agents during the Cold War. It was a vintage Soviet espionage move, and fittingly so, for a current Russian government that increasingly behaves as if it were operating in a different century.There wasn’t necessarily much contradiction when the Cold War agents passed themselves off as Tass reporters. In the Soviet era, a journalist was understood to be a Kremlin trumpet, and journalism was simply another government job. The attitude, common to many authoritarian governments, was that a press built on the Western oppositional model is innately harmful to the state and its subjects. The government is assumed to be benevolent and wiser than the mass of its citizens, and why should reporters get in the way of its good work? In Singapore, this notion — that the press and the government should work in tandem to make the country better — is called “rowing as a team.”In post-Soviet Russia, the idea that the press is essentially a branch of the government never truly went away, except for during a brief spell in the 1990s and again during Dmitri Medvedev’s presidency. In fact, what’s interesting is that many Russians, at least in my anecdotal experience, assume that the press operates in the same way in the United States. When I was traveling around Siberia a couple of years ago and introduced myself to people as an American journalist, many of them immediately assumed I was a C.I.A. agent. Russian friends and acquaintances tell me they don’t see a difference between, say, ABC and Russia Today, the Kremlin-funded English-language TV channel. “It’s all the same thing,” a Moscow friend told my father recently. “It’s all propaganda.”Today, in the wake of the failed pro-democracy protests and the incursions into Ukraine, the state has gobbled up even more media outlets and squeezed the few that still insist on maintaining their independence from the Kremlin. The news site Lenta.ru, for instance, once a bulwark of independent, skeptical journalism, has been cleansed of its old team and now churns out copy that is often indistinguishable from the line pushed by the state-owned Channel 1. The old Soviet way of thinking, brought back by Vladimir Putin, a man who never really left that place, has returned. Last spring, as the state media became increasingly jingoistic, a poll found that 54 percent of Russians think information about sensitive issues can be legitimately manipulated in the interests of the state. Seventy-two percent think there are facts that can and should be suppressed if it is in the government’s interest. Only 4 percent said that the ideal journalist should be “independent and incorruptible.”The authors of the study, from the Kremlin-friendly FOM think tank, concluded — of course — that this is because “today’s media agenda resonates with the values and expectations of the majority of Russians.” But even more independent polls show a much greater comfort with authority and lack of suspicion toward the government in Russia than you would find in, say, the United States. This November, for instance, the independent Levada-Center found that trust in the Russian intelligence services has hit an all-time high — as have favorable opinions of history’s most potent symbol of the Russian state, Josef Stalin.When I mentioned to a friend in Moscow that I wanted to write about this phenomenon, he protested that it was standard practice in the Cold War, too, for the C.I.A. to use journalists in the same way that the K.G.B. did. In fact, it wasn’t — at least not for long. “There’s not really a Cold War parallel for that,” Gerecht told me. “Once upon a time, the agency would take journalists’ cover. But that was done for covert action projects; that wasn’t done for intelligence collection. You wouldn’t have used journalists to pose questions to others.”Robert Jervis, professor of International Politics at Columbia University and a more disinterested observer of intelligence history, says that even impersonating journalists for covert-action purposes fell out of favor with the C.I.A. after the 1960s. And after Watergate — when the American press, too, acquired a healthier dose of skepticism toward government — the practice stopped altogether. “For us, especially after the reforms in the wake of Watergate that reined in the C.I.A., there was a lot of pushback from journalists that this was putting them in danger, so we backed off,” Jervis told me.But what the U.S. government and media actually do or don’t do is sort of beside the point. As long as there are Kremlin-financed propaganda outfits like Russia Today, and as long as S.V.R. continues to use Russian journalists as conduits for information, Russians will assume Americans are doing the same thing. We’ve seen a lot of this in the last year: The more the Russian government acts nefariously toward its own citizens or its neighbors, the more Russians assume that the United States and its allies are doing the same. In fact, it is often the justification Russian officials give for severely restricting their citizens’ right to protest: Europe, Kremlin officials insist — usually incorrectly — has the same laws, and Russia is simply lining up with international norms. It’s a funny way of reinforcing your own paranoia.