This article was initially published as a letter to subscribers of The Upshot’s newsletter. You can sign up for the email here to get this and all of the best of The Upshot.An article by Josh Barro and Binyamin Appelbaum last week lamented the coming demotion of Alexander Hamilton on the $10 bill. Instead, they wrote, why not demote Andrew Jackson from the $20 bill?The Treasury Department, led by Jacob Lew, will select a woman to replace Hamilton for the main portrait on the bill and is seeking input from the public. Our readers weighed in on Hamilton vs. Jackson, and on some women who may fit the new bill.Our colleague Jackie Calmes wrote: “The only criterion under law is that the chosen person must be dead,” with Mr. Lew looking for a woman “who was a champion for our inclusive democracy.”Douglas Evans, San Francisco:If they are seriously considering a $10 bill, it would be more appropriate to issue a $7.76 bill since women only get paid 77 percent of what men do. At least that would bring attention to the inequality inherent in our economic system.Joe Ski, Grand Island, N.Y.:It seems that no one, including Treasury, is aware of the recently concluded Women on 20s campaign, in which, for the reasons cited here, hundreds of thousands of people voted in an elaborate multistage election process for a woman to replace Jackson on the $20 bill. The eventual winner was Harriet Tubman, in a close vote over Eleanor Roosevelt, followed by Rosa Parks.Tim0557, N.Y.:As much as I’d like to see Barbara Jordan’s image on our currency, it’s hard for me to deny that the most important woman in the history of our nation, hands down, is Eleanor Roosevelt.With honorable mention to Abigail Adams.Amy, Brooklyn:I think it’s poetic justice that the racist Andrew Jackson deserves to spend eternity paired with Harriett Tubman. Then again, it isn’t so fair to Ms. Tubman.RoughAcres, New York:Replacing Hamilton is dumb.Replacing Jackson is smart.Eleanor Roosevelt for the $20!MauiYankee, Maui:Amelia EarhartAnna Nicole Smith (would do anything for currency) Jon Davis, N.M.:Rosa Parks exemplifies the best of the American character far better than does Alexander Hamilton. Steve, Los Angeles:I nominate Rachel Carson.Lloyd Kannenberg, Weston, Mass.:Other countries — France, Germany, Italy, Switzerland, for example — have put scientists, authors and artists on their bank notes, not just politicians and generals. Before the euro the Netherlands had a beautiful 50 gulden note with a sunflower (but no Van Gogh) and a 250 gulden note with a lighthouse in which a tiny poem was embedded. Why couldn’t the United States do as much?Jason, D.C.:Let me say, with absolutely no amount of seriousness, that if Jackson is taken off the $20 bill, this nation will lose its ability to party.It is no coincidence that we had the Great Depression (the largest economic hangover in history) after Jackson was put on the bill. Nor is it surprising that the 60s and 70s happened just as inflation was making the $20 bill more important to everyday consumers. Today, we have perhaps reached the pinnacle of this trend as you actually have to work HARDER to get something other than a $20 bill out of an A.T.M. machine!This country owes its soul to the face of the president whose first official act was to ride his horse through a mob and lead them to the White House for a giant house party! Then, not to be outdone in the future by “Animal House,” he told Congress that THEY were picking up the check for the repairs! Such is the man...the myth...the legend of Andrew Jackson!