BERLIN —  When Nancy Glickman lights the torch for the 14th European Maccabi Games, being held for the first time in Berlin, she believes that her father, Marty Glickman, would have been proud of the honor — and the irony — of his legacy inspiring hundreds of Jewish athletes competing in the facilities that Hitler triumphantly presided over during the 1936 Olympic Games.“There would be a twinkle in his eye and a smile on his face, like he’d be thinking, ‘Yeah, they should be there,’ ” Ms. Glickman said on Monday, standing beneath the Olympic rings at the Nazi-era Olympiastadion where her father, an American track and field star from Brooklyn, marched in the opening ceremony 79 years ago.The participation of Mr. Glickman and his fellow Jewish teammate, Sam Stoller, ended soon after when the two were dropped from the 400-meter relay team in a last-minute decision that was viewed as an attempt by United States officials to avoid offending Hitler by fielding a winning team that was half Jewish.By inviting the descendants of Mr. Glickman and Mr. Stoller, who was represented by a cousin, Ann Stoller, to participate in the Maccabi Games, organizers sought to honor the past while sending a clear message about the survival of Jewish life into present.“It just increases the significance of everything we do, using sports to build Jewish pride and perpetuate Jewish continuity,” said Tonja Magerman, who leads the organizing committee of the United States’ Maccabi team.The opening ceremony will be held on Tuesday in the Waldbühne amphitheater that is part of Berlin’s Olympic sports complex.The games in Berlin come at a time when anti-Semitism has risen in Europe. A year ago, protesters from the streets of London to Berlin hurled racial slurs at Jews, and visiting soccer teams from Israel were attacked in Austria, against the backdrop of Israel’s military offensive in Gaza. Germany alone witnessed an arson attempt on a synagogue in the western city of Wuppertal, and attacks on an Orthodox teen in Berlin and a well-known Jewish rights campaigner in Frankfurt, among others.This year, the more than 2,000 participating Jewish athletes have been advised by the organizing committee to be cautious in public, including avoiding openly wearing skullcaps.“Security is a big issue,” Thomas de Maizière, Germany’s interior minister, told the Berlin public broadcaster RBB. “But not one we should be scared stiff about.” He added that the police should be able to meet the challenge.Maccabi leaders in Germany, nevertheless, have also hired private security companies, accounting for about a fifth of the event’s overall budget, which is 5 million euros ($5.5 million).On Monday, teams from across Europe, as well as the United States, Israel, Canada, Australia and Argentina, began training. Competition is scheduled to begin on Wednesday and continue through Aug. 5.For the first time, the games will include a cultural program intended to raise the event’s profile and broaden its outreach. Besides the 19 regular competitions, including basketball, fencing, soccer, triathlon and 10-pin bowling, German and Israeli athletes will take part in friendly matches in soccer and basketball. The half-marathon was even opened to participants from the general public.“It is our hope and our wish to make the European Maccabi Games more prominent,” said Oren Osterer, director of the organizing committee for the games, recalling past jokes about the competition being more of a large Jewish family reunion.“We don’t want this event to be held in the back courtyards anymore, but to be viewed as a cultural and sporting event,” Mr. Osterer said.But trying to raise the profile of the games is not without its concerns. In 1972, the young, post-World War II West German democracy tried to distance itself from the police state of 1936, but its hosting of the Olympics ended with the massacre of 11 Israeli Olympic athletes and coaches at the hands of Palestinian terrorists.Since then, the German authorities have learned to strike a balance between friendliness and safety.Alon Meyer, the president of Maccabi Germany, said the decision to award the 2015 games to Berlin was emotional for some. The Maccabi games grew out of a European movement in the late 19th century, when Jews were routinely excluded from club and other sports competitions, and are now held every four years in Israel, with regional competitions rotating throughout Europe.Some organizers said they refused to step foot in Germany, even 70 years after the defeat of the Nazis and 50 years after the country established diplomatic relations with Israel.Mr. Meyer, who is a member of Frankfurt’s Jewish community, said he feels safe in Germany and believes that a new generation of Jews and Germans have “long since addressed and worked through the guilt question.” But, he said, he accepts that not everyone involved in the Maccabi movement shares that view.“There are those who want to embark on this journey with us, and we want to bring them along,” Mr. Meyer said. “There are those who don’t want to be a part of what we are doing, and we accept that.”Mindful of history, Maccabi organizers have also included an educational program for athletes, including tours of the Sachsenhausen concentration camp, which was opened during the 1936 Olympic Games.The summer games were a watermark for Hitler, who was able to showcase both his power and his high standing with the German public, particularly in the spectacular opening ceremony that was captured by the filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl.But behind the scenes, the Nazis were already persecuting Jews and laying the groundwork for a campaign of extermination that resulted in the deaths of six million and the decimation of the Jewish community in Europe.At the time of the Games, a few journalists reported on Sachsenhausen and the darker picture of German life. But many visitors came away from the Berlin Olympics with the impression that Nazi Germany was not as bad as critics made it out to be, said David Clay Large, a historian and the author of a book on the 1936 Games.“After the Games, the Nazis stepped up the persecution of Jews in the belief that nothing would be done about it,” Mr. Large said in a telephone interview from Bozeman, Mont. “In that sense, the Berlin Olympics played a very important role in the Nazis’ anti-Jew policies.”By allowing hundreds of Jewish athletes to compete here in the fields and stadiums that Hitler built to showcase the prowess of Aryan athletes, both the Jewish community and modern Germany are sending a message about how far they each have come — the Germans in developing a sophisticated pluralistic, open democracy, and the Jews in re-establishing a flourishing community in Germany.Ms. Glickman, who lives near Washington, D.C., said her father, who died in 2001 at 83, remained proud of having been an Olympian. Despite being denied his chance at a gold medal, Mr. Glickman went on to have a distinguished place in American sports, working for decades as a radio announcer in New York for the Knicks, Jets and Giants.She said she believes his experience in Berlin contributed to his profoundly inclusive personality. “Some of that came out of this,” Ms. Glickman said.Clutching the red-white-and-blue striped singlet of his 1936 uniform, she waved it at the box where Hitler presided over the Games. “We’re here, Dad!” she called, echoing Mr. Glickman’s own shout of triumph in 1985, when he returned to the Olympic Stadium and yelled at the Nazi leader’s ghost, “I am still here and you are not.”Ms. Glickman turned to her 26-year-old daughter, Travis von Keller, telling her that if she had children of her own one day, she would have to bring them here. Ms. von Keller nodded at the idea of a new family tradition in honor of the grandfather who taught her to sprint in the hallways of his Manhattan apartment building. “It’s a thing now,” she said.