BANGKOK —  The head of Myanmar’s governing party has been removed from his post in what one aide described as a “coup,” the most visible sign yet of splintering within the country’s military elite and the resurgence of conservative forces that dominated under decades of military rule.The removal of Thura Shwe Mann as chairman of the military-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party came as campaigning was underway for elections in November. The United States and other foreign governments have characterized the elections as a litmus test for whether Myanmar’s military elites, who still control the government and bureaucracy despite recent moves toward democracy, are genuinely willing to give up power.Mr. Shwe Mann, who was seen as a leading candidate for president in the coming elections, was the third most powerful member of the junta that ruled Myanmar until 2011. But as speaker of the lower house of Parliament in the current civilian administration, he has formed an informal alliance with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Peace laureate and opposition leader. Conservative forces in the military were thought to be uncomfortable with that.The governing party said in a statement on Thursday that Mr. Shwe Mann still held his post as speaker in Parliament. But his role as a deal maker between democratic forces and the military establishment appeared to be in doubt.It was unclear where Mr. Shwe Mann was on Thursday, and efforts to reach him were unsuccessful.The party reorganization, which developed overnight Wednesday, was more in the style of a purge: Security forces were deployed outside party headquarters in Naypyidaw, the capital. Some local news media reported that officials were not allowed to leave the building.The party said in its statement that Mr. Shwe Mann had been removed as chairman because “the present time requires that the party’s tasks be executed more effectively.” The deputy head of the party, U Htay Oo, has taken over in his place, the statement said.U Myint Htwe, a senior officer in the Ministry of Information, confirmed the presence of security forces at party headquarters, saying they were “necessary for the situation.” Local news media reported that U Maung Maung Thein, the general secretary of the party, had also been removed from his post.The party did not explain the underlying reasons for the leadership change. On a basic level, the move appeared to be a struggle for power. The local news media has described a split in recent weeks between Mr. Shwe Mann and President Thein Sein, who is not running in the coming elections but is still eligible to be chosen as president by Myanmar’s electoral college. Mr. Shwe Mann has long desired the presidency, and Mr. Thein Sein may have wanted to sideline him.The party upheaval came at the same time as a shake-up among government ministers. The state news media said the departing ministers were “allowed to resign.” Discussing the cabinet reshuffle in an interview with Voice of America, the presidential spokesman U Ye Htut hinted about divisions among political elites.“Any party will have to go about changes when its leadership deviates from the party’s policies, ignores the party members’ will, prioritizes personal profit over the country’s interests and creates factionalism within the party,” he said.Whatever the reasons, the way the change in party leadership was carried out harked back to the days of military rule, when purges of top officials were common.Mr. Shwe Mann did not comment publicly on his removal, but one of his aides said he was not at party headquarters when the leadership change took place.“It had to be done by force because it could not be done by voting,” said the aide, who spoke on the condition of anonymity out of fear for his safety. He estimated that 200 security personnel had been at party headquarters when the meeting was convened Wednesday evening.The new party leadership also ordered the suspension of The Union Daily, a party newspaper that editors close to Mr. Shwe Mann managed.Mr. Shwe Mann, like many politicians in Myanmar today, is a complex and somewhat compromised figure. As a leading member of the former junta, he was complicit in the persecution and economic mismanagement that left millions in poverty and kept thousands in prison for their political beliefs.But as speaker, he sought to bolster the power of Parliament and pushed legislation opposed by the military that would have decentralized the country’s hierarchical administration, a legacy of military rule. His partnership with Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi was tenuous, but some saw hope for a grand bargain between the military and democratic forces.Candidates for the Nov. 8 election must submit applications by Friday, giving Mr. Shwe Mann little time to maneuver. He appears to remain a member of the Union Solidarity and Development Party. The party was formed under junta rule as a way to allow soldiers to become politicians under a new, nominally civilian, political system.