LOS ANGELES — After a record low turnout in last year’s election, Gov. Jerry Brown of California signed legislation on Saturday designed to increase electoral participation by automatically registering eligible state voters when they obtain a driver’s license.The law, which allows Californians to opt out of registering at the Department of Motor Vehicles, was the most prominent of more than a dozen bills relating to elections that Mr. Brown signed on Saturday. It puts California at the forefront of efforts across the country to increase electoral participation at a time when many states have added new hurdles, like voter identification laws.The new law will “help improve elections and expand voter rights and access in California,” the governor’s office said in a statement.Less than a third of the eligible population voted in November, when Mr. Brown easily won re-election. The 42 percent turnout of registered voters was a record low for a statewide general election; in addition, 6.6 million people who are eligible to vote are not registered, according to the California secretary of state, Alex Padilla, who pushed for the “motor voter” law as a way to boost participation.Mr. Padilla said that, over time, the law could help add about six million people to the rolls in California.“There will be a huge influx of new voters, and that’s good for our democracy,” Mr. Padilla said. “We want to serve as a contrast to what we see happening in other states, where they are making it more difficult to register or actually cast a ballot. I think that’s flat out un-American, and we can show a different, better way with the automatic registration system.”California is the second state to adopt an automatic voter registration system, following Oregon, which passed a similar measure earlier this year.“I hope doing this in California, as big and diverse as we are, will demonstrate to the rest of the country that it can be done,” Mr. Padilla added.Already, Californians have the option to register when getting a driver’s license at the Department of Motor Vehicles. But it requires them to fill out additional paperwork — a hurdle high enough to stop many — and, in practice, voter advocates have said drivers are not always offered the additional form.The new law will automatically register everyone who obtains or renews a driver’s license and who is legally eligible to vote unless he or she specifically opts out.Some Republicans have opposed the law, saying that it could lead to increased fraud.The law takes effect in January. However, no changes to the registration process will be made until the state’s new computerized voter registration database is ready later next year.The California Latino Legislative Caucus, a group of lawmakers, celebrated the signing of the law as a victory for young minorities in particular, who they said make up the bulk of the state’s eligible unregistered voters.“By leveraging 21st-century technologies, we have a chance to remedy the inequitable distribution of election resources,” the group said in a statement on Saturday.