A federal appeals court in Kentucky on Wednesday affirmed a ruling ordering a county clerk who objects to same-sex marriage on religious grounds to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples.The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit in Frankfort upheld the lower court decision two months to the day after the Supreme Court struck down bans on same-sex marriage. Kim Davis, the clerk in Rowan County, about 60 miles east of Lexington, has refused to issue any marriage licenses since the justices’ June decision, saying that her Christian faith bars her from authorizing same-sex marriages.In July, she was sued by four couples who were turned away after the ruling in the case of Obergefell v. Hodges, in which the Supreme Court held that bans on same-sex marriage violated the due process clause of the Constitution and the equal protection clause in the 14th Amendment.A federal district judge in eastern Kentucky ordered Ms. Davis to issue the licenses, but delayed his order so that she could have time to appeal. A three-judge panel on the appeals court denied her request for a stay on Wednesday.A lawyer for Ms. Davis told The Associated Press that he was disappointed in the ruling and that his client could appeal to the Supreme Court.The lawsuit against Ms. Davis was filed by the state branch of the American Civil Liberties Union on behalf of four couples: April Miller and Karen Roberts, Shantel Burke and Stephen Napier, Jody Fernandez and Kevin Holloway, and L. Aaron Skaggs and Barry W. Spartman.Daniel J. Canon, a cooperating lawyer for the plaintiffs, said their marriage hopes were tempered by the expectation that Ms. Davis and her lawyers would fight until she ran out of legal options.“This is the third opinion issued against Ms. Davis herself, and one would think that this would educate her on a core tenet of democracy, which is that politicians cannot govern according to their religious beliefs,” he said.A federal judge had partly overturned Kentucky’s ban on gay marriage before the Supreme Court ruling on June 26, but the state spent two years and more than $2 million defending the ban in federal court.Conservative Christians have fought back vigorously against the Supreme Court ruling, arguing that laws protecting gays and legalizing same-sex marriage infringe on the rights of religious people who believe homosexuality is a sin.