On Monday, Donald Trump stood aboard the U.S.S. Yorktown before a sprawling crowd. Earlier in the day, he had introduced a proposal that, in a candidacy notable for its bombast, was his most bombastic yet: a “total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States.” The reaction in the media was instantaneous, enormous — the eyes of the world were on Trump. And yet the man, that night, struck me as far less important than the roar of the crowd that greeted him.The roar came when Trump read his press statement aloud. It was a long, full-bodied roar — hands clapping, fists stabbing the air. The roar you give when things that you and your family and your friends have long believed are suddenly utterable on what is arguably the greatest stage on earth: the American presidential election. It was a roar of relief: These were no longer notions that had to be muttered under your breath. Trump wasn’t just “saying what he means,” in that phrase so often used by pundits to explain his success. He, the freest of men, was saying what they meant.The American establishment has spent this week trying to metabolize that statement. The Hitler comparisons are fading; people are calming down. Trump, too, will pass, they tell themselves. He is a Queens-sized personality, so he is treated as a personality; his positions are seen as synonymous with his person. The hope seems to be that if he goes away, the ideas will go away, too. But what if Trumpism outlasts Trump?Think, for starters, of the millions who apparently agree with him. A poll from Bloomberg Politics/Purple Strategies found that two-thirds of likely 2016 G.O.P. primary voters favor the moratorium on Muslims entering the United States. The idea is already twice as popular as its champion. Last Saturday, two days before his statement on Muslims, Fox News began a four-evening poll in South Carolina. Trump drew 30 percent support on the two nights before his proposal, and 38 percent on the two nights following it. Meanwhile, about half of Trump supporters in North Carolina and in New Hampshire want to “see the mosques in the country shut down.” In the North Carolina poll, only one-quarter of Trump supporters said they thought Islam should even be legal in the United States; 44 percent thought not.This suggests that there is an enormous constituency favoring this set of (probably unconstitutional) ideas, despite the fact that they have been rejected by most of the American political class. Trump didn’t generate this constituency with a few brash statements. He harnessed feelings that long predated his candidacy — feelings of besiegement and alienation, of being silenced — and gave them an unprecedented respectability. Even if Trump leaves the stage by springtime, he has galvanized, gathered and given voice to all these Americans.America is living through an era of dramatic changes: its demographics shifting, its middle class contracting, its institutions grappling with the pressures of the networked age. Trump isn’t winning those Americans who tend to experience this change as a tailwind. But he has enthralled millions who experience it as a headwind, and his relentless campaign against “political correctness” has given voice to their fears: about terrorism; about a country passing into new hands, with the attendant loss of privileges and certainties; about a democracy that will never solve problems if we cannot call radical Islam radical Islam. This anti-P.C. sentiment, so vital to Trump’s brand, is often minimized on the left as simple intolerance. But the longing for less-muzzled debates is to many on the right what campaign finance is to many on the left: the issue we must solve to be able to solve any other issue.This is how Trumpism might outlast Trump — by gelling this anxiety and longing into a movement, by giving a new permission to question who is American, by redrawing the borders of respectable debate.Americans are more fearful about fresh terrorist attacks than at any time since Sept. 11, 2001, a New York Times/CBS News poll found this week. In the autumn of 2001, that fear triggered an Islamophobic backlash and a spate of attacks against Muslims and people thought to be Muslim. In recent days, reports from across the nation have suggested that history is repeating itself in this way, too — including the beating this week of the owner of the Fatima Food Mart in Astoria, Queens.I wrote a book, “The True American,” about the 2001 backlash and Mark Stroman, an angry white drifter who was galvanized by 9/11 to shoot three immigrant clerks in the food marts of Dallas. Studying Stroman’s life, I learned how a man who had mostly been just a blustery, racist petty criminal had been inspired to action by the feverish atmosphere around him: the endless reruns of the planes hitting the towers, the endless talk of America being “under siege” and threatened in its freedoms, the Orwellian officialese of terms like “enemy combatants,” which inspired Stroman to call himself an “allied combatant.”But there is one difference between then and now. In 2001, Stroman got virtually zero encouragement from anyone in the American political class. “The enemy of America is not our many Muslim friends,” President George W. Bush said the week after the attacks. Today, amid this new wave of fear, Islamophobic rhetoric is openly articulated by major national figures, including but not limited to Trump. We’re left to hope that it will fail to encourage any new Mark Stromans.America, thankfully, is not an easy nation to commandeer. Its institutions and rule of law and Constitution, still envied throughout the world, probably make it Trump-proof — that is to say, impervious to many of his proposals, even if he were to win the presidency. And yet not a small number of observers, trying to digest this week’s news, found themselves researching the dates and methods of Hitler’s rise, wondering how exactly something that seemed unacceptable yesterday becomes acceptable today, and whether we trust ourselves to notice when it does.On Tuesday, I turned on “Morning Joe,” on MSNBC. It was the morning after Trump’s statement on Muslims, and Joe Scarborough, the conservative host, was musing that we were living in our own American version of Germany circa 1933. One by one, the denizens of the round table lambasted Trump.Then Trump called in. The interview proceeded for more than a half-hour; Trump ran circles around the journalists. Then they analyzed. They still criticized him but now their talk was of his effectiveness: How does the man do it?On Thursday, I tuned in again. By now, the hosts’ outrage had become a desire to compromise with Trump: What if we just increased surveillance of immigrants? (“It’s going to have to be nonstop surveillance,” Scarborough said.) What if we shut down immigration from war-torn countries like Syria, rather than from a religion? “What’s the middle ground?” Scarborough asked.Forty-eight hours earlier: Germany, 1933. Now: where can we meet in the middle?Perhaps this is how the sensible fold: by accepting as a given the question proposed by the extremist and scurrying to offer alternative solutions. When Trump made his proposal on Monday, he was not merely seeking to solve a Muslim question, he was seeking to make a Muslim question a thing. “Morning Joe” gave that latter project a boost. A wide consensus about the existence of a Muslim question would certainly leave Trumpism with us in Trump’s absence.What other unthinkable questions will we acquiesce in asking? What other unmentionable solutions will we let ourselves propose?