WASHINGTON —  A veteran House member from Philadelphia, one of his staff members, a lobbyist and two others were indicted Wednesday by the federal authorities in connection with bribery schemes and the misuse of hundreds of thousands of dollars in federal, charitable and campaign funds.The representative, Chaka Fattah, a Democrat, spoke with members of the executive and legislative branches in 2008 to help the lobbyist get an ambassadorship or appointment to the United States Trade Commission. In exchange for his efforts, the F.B.I. said, Mr. Fattah received $18,000 from the associate that had been disguised “as a payment for a car sale that never actually took place.”Mr. Fattah, 58, who ran for mayor of Philadelphia in 2007, also took funds from his mayoral and congressional campaigns to repay his son’s college debt, the F.B.I. said. In that scheme, Mr. Fattah and his staff member had his campaign pay a political consulting firm, which in turn made 34 payments on the loan for about $23,000.Mr. Fattah’s son, Chaka Jr., was indicted by the federal authorities in 2014 on fraud charges. The son has vigorously fought the charges and has contended he was collateral damage as the Justice Department tried to catch his father.The authorities said that a nonprofit organization that had been started by the father was used to repay $600,000 to a supporter who had given him a loan in connection with his 2007 campaign for mayor.“To conceal the contribution and repayment scheme, the defendants and others allegedly created sham contracts and made false entries in accounting records, tax returns and campaign finance disclosure statements,” the F.B.I. said.Mr. Fattah said in a statement that he would “proudly continue to serve my constituents.”“I have never participated in any illegal activity or misappropriation of taxpayer dollars as an elected official,” he said, adding, “I am confident that I will be cleared of these charges.”Mr. Fattah was first elected to Congress in 1994 after serving as a Pennsylvania state legislator for a dozen years. He is a member of the House Appropriations Committee. Mr. Fattah said that under House rules, he had stepped aside from his role as the ranking Democrat of the Appropriations subcommittee on commerce, justice, science and related agencies.“When elected officials betray the trust and confidence placed in them by the public, the department will do everything we can to ensure that they are held accountable,” said Leslie R. Caldwell, the assistant attorney general in the Justice Department’s Criminal Division. “Public corruption takes a particularly heavy toll on our democracy because it undermines people’s basic belief that our elected leaders are committed to serving the public interest, not to lining their own pockets.”