NEW TAIPEI CITY, Taiwan — Most people in Taiwan are probably aware of the island’s pre-eminent performance group, Cloud Gate Dance Theater, even if they have no interest in modern dance.Board a bus or a subway here, and you may see images of the troupe’s dancers emblazoned on the sides. Visit the popular Tamsui district and you may catch a glimpse of the company’s gleaming new $22 million home, which opened in April. If you travel on China Airlines, Taiwan’s flagship carrier, you may even fly on the Cloud Gate Liveried Aircraft, adorned with dancers’ likenesses. The airline unveiled it last year, saying the troupe represented the “pinnacle of Taiwan culture.”Founded in 1973, Cloud Gate was Taiwan’s first professional dance company. Forty-two years later, it has become a roving, bounding symbol of this island. On Wednesday, it will open the annual Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music with the United States premiere of a 2013 work, “Rice.” The visit, with performances through Saturday, will be its sixth to the academy, and its first stop on a tour that will include performances in Los Angeles (January) and Washington (February). The company moves on to Paris in the spring.Promoting Taiwan’s image abroad is a responsibility that Cloud Gate’s founder, artistic director and chief choreographer, Lin Hwai-Min, 68, does not take lightly.“He’s a very public figure,” said Yatin Lin (no relation), a professor of dance studies at Taipei National University of the Arts. “Because of the political situation with mainland China, it’s very difficult for our political leaders to be active abroad, so many people see him as not just an artist but as a kind of cultural ambassador for Taiwan.”This month, that commitment was on display as the choreographer marched into the rehearsal theater at the company’s new complex, clad in his signature uniform (black T-shirt, black pants) and brandishing a black backpack and a pack of cigarettes. While he settled at a table facing the stage, the company’s 22 dancers readied themselves for their first full run-through of “Rice” in a month.As the music — a compilation of Hakka folk songs, drumming and Western classical music — began, a lone dancer strode out holding a long, quivering rattan stick. In the next 70 minutes, the dancers stamped, leapt and folded and unfolded their bodies in a demonstration of Cloud Gate’s hybrid aesthetic, which combines Western classical dance techniques with Eastern “rounded” movements that draw on martial arts and tai chi. Missing from the run-through was the production’s backdrop, a sumptuous video filmed on location over a cycle of rice cultivation in Chihshang in southeastern Taiwan.Mr. Lin sat mostly silent, scribbling notes and only intermittently shouting (“Don’t rush, don’t rush!” and “Breathe!”). After the dancers took their final, choreographed bows, he stood and went through his notes, working with individuals on minor tweaks. The rehearsal had gone well and now the dancers just needed to focus on taking care of their bodies for the coming season, he told them later as they sat around him on the stage, stretching and massaging their muscles with foam rollers.Later, in the company’s offices, Mr. Lin talked about the obligations he felt toward the dancers and society.“I often remind the dancers that when they are onstage, they are often the only Taiwanese people that a lot of people get to see that are actually labeled as Taiwanese,” he said.Much has changed since Mr. Lin was born in Taiwan in 1947. Chiang Kai-shek and his Kuomintang’s National Revolutionary Army fled here in 1949 after losing the civil war to Mao’s Chinese Communists. The Kuomintang ruled Taiwan with an authoritarian hand for decades until 1996, when Taiwanese voters elected their president for the first time. Taiwan has been considered a democracy ever since (and may elect its first female president in January), but the island remains a disputed territory.Growing up as the oldest of five children, Mr. Lin nurtured multiple passions, for politics, writing and dance. Only years later, while a student at the University of Iowa Writers’ Workshop, did he decide to pursue choreography. He had spent two summers in New York studying dance at the Martha Graham School, and after completing his degree at Iowa he returned to Taiwan, and soon started Cloud Gate.The company’s birth came just two years after what Mr. Lin, like many other Taiwanese, sees as a defining moment in the nation’s recent political history: the 1971 resolution that displaced the government in Taipei as the representative of China at the United Nations in favor of the government in Beijing.“When I started the company I said, ‘Composed by Chinese, choreographed by Chinese, danced by Chinese, for a Chinese audience,’ ” said Mr. Lin, whose family has lived in Taiwan for generations. “Then Taiwan was kicked out of the U.N. and all of a sudden I had to figure out who I was.”The event inspired “Legacy” (1978), which portrayed the early history of Taiwan. It was followed by such works as “Songs of the Wanderers,” “Moon Water” and the “Cursive” trilogy.Reviews of Cloud Gate’s performances in the United States have been mixed. Critics have lauded the company's East-meets-West approach, with Anna Kisselgoff writing in The New York Times in 2003 that “Moon Water” was a “work unlike any other.” But Alastair Macaulay of The Times wrote in 2011 that the works were “repetitive” and called “Water Stains on the Wall” “devoid of lightness and humor.”As the company’s stature grew, so too did the modern dance scene in Taiwan.“Before Cloud Gate, there wasn’t even such thing as a wuzhe,” said Ping Heng, 57, the founder and artistic director of Dance Forum Taipei, using the term for dancer. “Before, people thought dancing was something you could do in school, but it wasn’t something worthy of being a profession. They just called dancers ‘tiaowu de ren,’ ” literally, people who dance.Lin Lee-Chen, 65, the founder and artistic director of the Legend Lin Dance Theater in Taipei, said, “The dance scene in Taiwan today is very diverse,” with dance companies “of all sizes and styles.”When asked about his possible retirement, Mr. Lin of Cloud Gate was reluctant to comment. But he acknowledged that the company’s new complex, which he said would allow his troupe and other dance and theatrical ventures to perpetuate the “Cloud Gate energy,” would make it easier for him to step away.Still, “I don’t want any statues,” he said. “I’m a Buddhist. I think everything is just illusory, especially for dancers.“We know that dance happens, but it also vanishes when it happens,” he said. “All we are creating is air. We are giving society a different air, that’s all.”