LONDON — Amid growing debate in Europe over electronic spying, an independent report on Thursday called for changes to Britain’s surveillance laws, arguing that they are undemocratic and opaque, and that they risk eroding confidence in the oversight of intelligence agencies.Seeking to balance fears over terrorist threats with concerns over privacy, the document highlighted growing challenges for the spy agencies, including encryption, and said they should be able to continue bulk collection of intercepted data, though with better oversight.But the report by a senior lawyer, David Anderson, argued that Britain’s main legislation on electronic surveillance was “incomprehensible to all but a tiny band of initiates,” a situation further confused by other laws “without statutory safeguards.”“This state of affairs is undemocratic, unnecessary and – in the long run – intolerable,” said the 373-page document, the result of an inquiry which took almost a year to complete.The report was commissioned with cross-party support by an act of Parliament last year, but Prime Minister David Cameron is not obligated to make any of the recommended changes.There has been vigorous debate across Europe over potential threats to privacy, prompted by the release of documents two years ago by Edward J. Snowden, the former National Security Agency contractor.In Germany, the government has been embroiled in a dispute over reports that its spies cooperated with the N.S.A., a source of embarrassment to Chancellor, Angela Merkel, who made her anger known when allegations surfaced that her own cellphone was monitored.The privacy issue is generally seen as less sensitive in Britain, partly because of greater support for the intelligence agencies, and worries about the potential threat from Britons returning home after fighting with jihadists in Syria and Iraq. But Mr. Anderson, who reviews the way the country’s terrorism laws work, argued that this degree of consent was at risk because of the flawed approach to .“The threat that I see of not accepting my recommendations, or recommendations along these lines,” Mr. Anderson said, “is that people become disenchanted with the whole business of intelligence gathering. They believe some of the wilder allegations that came out of the Snowden affair – I would say unfounded wild allegations that the state is reading into people’s emails the whole time when patently it isn’t.”“If this sense of disillusionment and disenchantment is perpetuated and spreads further,” he said, “then I think both law enforcement and intelligence lose the public confidence that they actually need if they are going to do an effective job.”In mid-2014, Mr. Anderson was asked to specifically examine powers given to the British authorities, including the interception of communications and electronic data.His main proposal calls for the creation of an Independent Surveillance and Intelligence Commission to oversee the intelligence agencies, which would include serving or retired judges who would provide judicial authorization for most surveillance warrants. Almost all such warrants are currently authorized by a senior minister in Britain.A new law “should be drafted from scratch,” the report said while also suggesting that the “capability of the security and intelligence agencies to practice bulk collection of intercepted material and associated date should be retained.”Mr. Anderson told reporters that he was not recommending extensive new powers. “I am saying there already are very extensive powers and they need to be properly regulated,” he said.The document is significant because the British government wants to give the authorities new powers over electronic surveillance. The exact measures have not been made public, but they could force Internet service providers and mobile operators to record more data about whom people call, text, instant message and engage with on social media.The expanded authority, widely known as the “snoopers charter,” was blocked under the previous government by the junior coalition partner, the Liberal Democrats. But now that Mr. Cameron has been re-elected with a parliamentary majority, he is in a position to proceed.The findings of the Anderson review published Thursday are expected to feed into that plan for new legislation. The Home Secretary, Theresa May, said she would consider the findings but did not commit to abiding by them.Mr. Anderson was cautious about any move to force companies to retain the browsing history of their clients, but he argued that his proposals might make American technology companies more willing to cooperate with British intelligence agencies because some companies in the United States “disliked” the idea of ministers, rather than judges, authorizing warrants.“One major company went so far as to suggest that if the U.K. introduced judicial authorization, more cooperation would be forthcoming, though I was not left with the impression that this was a universal view,” the report said.Cian Murphy, a legal expert at King’s College, London, welcomed the conclusions. “The report acknowledges the challenges — for both privacy and security — in the current law and sets out a blueprint for a new legal architecture,” he said. “It gives Britain the best possible chance for effective and proportionate powers, in compliance with the law and protective of civil liberties.”There was also a positive reaction from Shami Chakrabarti, the director of Liberty, a British group that campaigns for civil liberties. “Whilst we don’t agree with all his conclusions,” she said in a statement, “Mr. Anderson’s intervention could be the beginning of rebuilding public trust in surveillance conducted with respect for privacy, democracy and the law. It is further vindication of Edward Snowden’s courage.”Opposition politicians have argued that Britain has been slower to debate the issues than the United States.Critics have long argued that British laws are too broad, focusing particularly on the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act. They say the act has allowed bodies like municipalities access to metadata for electronic activity — information about emails, telephone calls and websites visited, but not the content.Surveillance can be authorized for purposes that include preventing disorder or collecting tax, according to Liberty. The police have also used the law to make applications to uncover the sources of journalists.