During the months following the November 2014 midterm elections, several House Democrats convened a series of secret meetings to plot the future of their party’s leadership.The party had just endured a nationwide thrashing in the midterms and, at every level below the presidency, had little reason to feel all that optimistic about 2016. Retaking the Senate would be at best a 50-50 proposition. Democrats controlled only 18 of the nation’s 50 statehouses and 11 of its state legislatures, and those numbers seemed unlike to improve anytime soon. The prospects going forward were particularly grim in the House, where the number of Democratic members — 188 — was the lowest it had been since the Hoover administration.Unsurprisingly, then, the party’s discontent is still particularly acute within the House Democratic caucus. “We just keep losing,” Representative Jim Himes of Connecticut told me. “You’d have to be insane not to conduct some soul-searching. And that soul-searching, when you keep losing, can easily — unfortunately — lead to recriminations and backbiting.”Impatience toward the party’s House leadership — headed by the minority leader, Nancy Pelosi — began bubbling over after the midterms. As Representative Marcia Fudge of Ohio, a former chairwoman of the Congressional Black Caucus, told me: “After the last election, they refused to even admit that we were just destroyed. They were patting themselves on the back for the losses we took: `Oh, it could’ve been so much worse.’ There’s a great deal of frustration.” She added: “Most members don’t want to come to caucus or whip meetings. I think some of them see the House as a quagmire, and they want to find a way out.”It was in that atmosphere of postelection anxiety that House Democrats began having furtive discussions on the House floor and on the phone with Representative Chris Van Hollen of Maryland. Since winning his House seat in 2002, Van Hollen had been a rising star in the Democratic Party. He had solid progressive credentials, and Pelosi accorded him star-pupil status in her caucus. And at 56, he is what Washington considers youthful; Pelosi, Steny Hoyer (the minority whip) and James Clyburn (the assistant Democratic leader) are all in their mid-70s. By January of this year, several of Van Hollen’s colleagues, convinced that the party was in desperate need of a new direction, were encouraging him to immediately begin mounting an effort to succeed Pelosi by the end of 2016.The question was how. Apart from making vague references to the desirability of “generational change,” Pelosi had sent no signals as to when she might give up her top post. What she had made tacitly clear was that she had no intentions of ceding it to Hoyer, who like Pelosi was raised in Maryland and about whom Pelosi nurtured some ancient but intractable grudge.Speaking of her attitude toward Hoyer, one Democratic congressman told me: “That’s not been good for us, and it has complicated a lot of our challenges. I consider myself a real fan of Steny. But the cards on the table are the ones we have to play. If the only way there’s going to be a change is for Chris to ascend, then that’s what we have to do.”Still, for Van Hollen to ascend, he and his supporters would have to furnish proof to Pelosi that he could muster a majority of votes within the caucus to beat Hoyer in a leadership race. So, early in 2015, Van Hollen proceeded to do just that. In this task, he was assisted by seven House Democratic colleagues from across the party spectrum: Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro, a Connecticut liberal who happens to be one of Pelosi’s closest associates; Steve Israel, a centrist representing Long Island who had until recently been Van Hollen’s successor at the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee; two veteran progressives, Lloyd Doggett from Austin and Paul Tonko from upstate New York; the two-term moderates Beto O’Rourke from El Paso and Dan Kildee from Flint, Mich.; and Donna Edwards, a fellow Maryland representative and a protégée of Pelosi.But then something entirely unexpected took place: On March 2, Maryland’s senior senator, Barbara Mikulski, announced that she would not be seeking another term in 2016. Van Hollen had thought hard about running when the other Maryland Senate seat opened up in 2006. Now, after 27 years holding her seat, Mikulski had offered a rare opportunity for a fellow Maryland Democrat to break free from the minority in the raucous lower chamber and join the elite Senate. For an upwardly mobile politician like Van Hollen, such a temptation was akin to a biological imperative — unless, perhaps, Nancy Pelosi offered him the one enticement that might keep him in the House.Van Hollen’s seven supporters convened a meeting on the evening of Tuesday, March 3, to discuss strategy. (Five of the participants confirmed the details of this and the other secret meetings to me.) Van Hollen arrived 20 minutes late. “I was in Pelosi’s office,” he said by way of apology as he walked in. Before he could say anything else, one of the members stood up to go. It was Donna Edwards. Citing a prior engagement, she hugged Van Hollen on her way out the door. “I’m still on the team,” she assured him.Van Hollen then proceeded to tell the others in the room what Pelosi had said. He told her that he was thinking about running for Mikulski’s Senate seat. She begged him not to, Van Hollen said. But Pelosi did not offer to step aside and endorse him as her replacement. Instead, he told his colleagues, she only “made an oblique reference to `transition.’ ” (Asked about this, Pelosi said with a laugh: “Did I make him an offer? It’s up to the caucus to choose.”)The others could tell that Van Hollen had not pressed the matter. Pelosi, they knew, did not respond well to ultimatums, and the mild-mannered Van Hollen was not the type to issue them.“I blew it in 2006,” he confessed to the others, adding that he was inclined to jump into the Senate race right away. Several in the room begged Van Hollen to reconsider. They told him they still intended to draw up their whip lists of persuadable Democrats. Van Hollen indicated that his mind was still open. “Do what you need to do,” he said.The next day, word leaked out that Van Hollen intended to run for Mikulski’s seat in 2016. That same day, Donna Edwards began talking privately with national progressive activists such as Jim Dean, the chair of the liberal grass-roots organization Democracy for America and the brother of the former presidential candidate Howard Dean. After securing their support, Edwards announced her candidacy a week later.When we spoke in March, I asked Van Hollen about his decision to leave behind his House career and the leadership post that might have awaited him. His response was eminently senatorial in its vagueness: “First of all, let me say I’m grateful to my colleagues, grateful they’ve encouraged me to run for leader at the appropriate time, and I’m really honored that people have faith in my leadership abilities. But this opening came up and I had to make a decision. I believe I can make a positive difference for the state. I believe it was the right decision. And once you make it, you go for it.”Those who supported Van Hollen’s brief leadership quest could understand his reasoning, but they nonetheless speak of his departure with a certain feeling of abandonment. “I’m for one really sad about the prospect that he’d be leaving the House and our caucus,” Beto O’Rourke told me. “He’s a smart guy and a good guy. It doesn’t help to lose people like that.”O’Rourke went on to speculate, morosely, that Van Hollen would not be the last person to exit the House Democratic caucus prematurely. “You look at my class, 2012,” he said. “Tulsi Gabbard, she’s not gonna stay in the House for long — she’ll run for governor or something else. Joe Kennedy, the same. Pat Murphy, the same. And they’re all talented, ambitious, good fund-raisers. But I’ve just got to think that when you see that 20-year road to being in a position of consequence, other options start to look a lot more attractive.” He added: “Being in the minority and not having a clear path to winning that majority — that’s got to have some bearing on it. This is only my second term, but talking to older members, they say: `When you’re in the majority, it’s a completely different job. If you have an idea, we can get that done. And that just won’t happen in the minority.’ ”