JERUSALEM —  Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s new government was sworn in on Thursday night after a stormy Parliament session that reflected much broader discontent over the political process that gave rise to the coalition dominated by right-wing and religious parties.There was none of the usual celebration of democracy that goes along with such swearing-in ceremonies. Instead, the proceedings were overshadowed by political tensions and antipathy after a long and bitter election campaign, arduous negotiations that produced the narrow and fragile governing coalition, and haggling up to the last minute over appointments.Commanding a razor-thin majority of 61 in the 120-seat Knesset, or Parliament, the government, made up of the conservative Likud Party and four other rival parties, is widely viewed as being inherently unstable and prone to pressures from all sides.Adding to the resentful atmosphere, senior members of Mr. Netanyahu’s own Likud Party were left to fight over the leftovers after several important government posts went to smaller coalition partners.The swearing-in ceremony at the Knesset was originally scheduled for 7 p.m., but horse-trading for the last few ministerial posts delayed it by two hours.Political commentators described the events of the day as an unseemly farce and an embarrassment for Mr. Netanyahu.Indeed, the prime minister himself was among those who called for a change in the system that would strengthen the larger political parties and make them less vulnerable to extortion by smaller parties.“We will preserve security, strive for peace, develop the economy and work to close the gaps in society,” Mr. Netanyahu pledged from the podium, amid fierce heckling from members of the opposition. Three Arab legislators were escorted out.Likud won a decisive victory in the March 17 elections, gaining 30 seats, six more than its main opponent, the center-left Zionist Union led by Isaac Herzog. Yet Mr. Netanyahu, who is starting a third consecutive term in office, and his fourth over all, failed to bring enough partners into the coalition to translate that triumph into a solid hold on power, leaving him weakened.Mr. Netanyahu said he still hoped to broaden the coalition and called on Mr. Herzog to join him and work with him to change the system.Mr. Netanyahu is holding on to the post of foreign minister, hoping to be able to bring the Zionist Union into the government at a later stage and to offer that post to Mr. Herzog.But in a blistering speech as leader of the opposition, Mr. Herzog told Mr. Netanyahu, “You did not create a government, you created a circus.”Mr. Herzog said he had no intention of joining the government, saying that he saw it as a transitional one until the next election.All this was happening only 26 months after the last government was sworn in. Mr. Netanyahu broke up that coalition because he said the internal frictions made it impossible to govern.Moshe Yaalon of the Likud is to continue as defense minister. Tzipi Hotovely, a hard-line member of the Likud who opposes the establishment of a Palestinian state, will, for the time being, handle Israel’s foreign relations as the deputy foreign minister. The fate of Gilad Erdan, one of Mr. Netanyahu’s most loyal lieutenants, was unresolved.Moshe Kahlon, leader of the new center-right Kulanu Party, which focuses on social issues, is finance minister. The rightist Jewish Home received the education and justice ministries.Two ultra-Orthodox parties, Shas and United Torah Judaism, complete the coalition. In return for their participation, Mr. Netanyahu agreed to reverse steps taken by his previous government to curb the financing of seminaries and to end ultra-Orthodox exemption from military service.The new government’s priorities include lowering the cost of living and solving the country’s housing crisis. The new policy guidelines state that the government will also advance the peace process and make an effort to reach a peace agreement with the Palestinians, though few believe that will be high on the government’s agenda, given its makeup.