RALEIGH, N.C. —  In 2011, soon after Republicans won control of the North Carolina General Assembly for the first time since Reconstruction, they set about redrawing congressional and state legislative districts to maximize their advantage, setting off legal challenges and bitter complaints from their rivals.But there is a new frontier in the battles over how democracy should work in North Carolina. And it is local.This session, bills introduced by Republican lawmakers would reconfigure a number of local government bodies around the state, prompting allegations that Republicans are gerrymandering and changing election rules at the city council and county commission levels.The General Assembly last week changed the composition of the Board of Commissioners in Wake County, home to 10 percent of the state’s population, after November elections in which Democrats gained a 7-0 majority there. Other spoils are both surprisingly puny, like Trinity, N.C., population 6,600, and very significant, like the Democratic stronghold of Greensboro, the state’s third-largest city.Republicans say the bills will encourage good government and, in some cases, increase representation and geographic diversity. State Senator Chad Barefoot, the Republican sponsor of the bill to change the Wake County board in Raleigh, said he was trying to bring more fairness to a system in which the deck was stacked in favor of urban voters at the expense of those in suburban and rural areas.“The current election process is unjust,” he said in a statement, “and we need to fix it.”But Democrats suspect less charitable motives.“They are drunk with their power, and are trying to reshape the rules to dictate the outcomes so that they win at every level of government, whether or not the voters want them to win,” said State Senator Josh Stein, a Democrat representing Wake County.In a hyperpartisan era, North Carolina is among the states that continue to redefine the outer levels of political combat over voting rules and district lines, with Republicans managing to achieve political influence well in excess of their numbers.The state is almost evenly split in presidential elections, and Democrats outnumber Republicans, but thanks in part to favorably drawn districts, Republicans hold 10 of 13 congressional seats. They also dominate both houses of the legislature. A legal challenge to the 2011 redistricting was rejected by the State Supreme Court late last year and has been appealed to the United States Supreme Court.At the same time, Democrats complain that Republicans have been bending the voting rules in their favor. The state has passed a law that curtails early voting, as well as strict voter identification rules — measures that critics say are designed to suppress minority turnout.Now, Democrats say, Republicans are using the General Assembly’s power, enshrined in state law, to tinker with local elected bodies in small and profound ways.“They’ve redistricted the state — the House districts, the congressional districts, the Senate districts — to tip the balance,” said Representative Brian M. Turner, a Democrat from Buncombe County. “And so now I feel like they’re moving further along the road to county commissions, city councils, trying to erode any power Democrats might have.”A degree of legislative meddling in local government affairs for political gain has a long history in North Carolina dating from Reconstruction.Gerry Cohen, a lobbyist who worked for more than three decades as the director of bill drafting for the General Assembly, noted that the Democratic legislature abolished the popular election of county commissioners in 1877 to prevent the election of black and white Republicans. Cohen said that Republicans also objected to redistricting of the Randolph County commission, in 1981, and the Guilford County commission, in 1991, both at the hands of the Democratic-controlled legislatures of the time.But critics say the new push is unprecedented in its scope, and even Gov. Pat McCrory, a Republican, has spoken out against it.“If someone wants to change the form of government in one of your cities, then go run for city council, for mayor,” Governor McCrory said last month, according to The News & Observer newspaper of Raleigh.Some of the bills under consideration would redraw districts and change the number of board members, while others would convert all of the state’s nonpartisan school board races to partisan ones.Some of the tinkering is surprisingly small bore. This session, State Representative Pat Hurley, a Republican, has filed a bill that would shrink the City Council in Trinity from nine members to six. She said in an interview that the current Council had become too quarrelsome and ineffective.Though the Trinity Council is officially nonpartisan, Jerry Daniels is among its members who suspect partisan politics at work.“She’s trying to get Republicans on the board and Democrats off,” he said. “I’m a Republican, and I’m upset about it.”In previous decades, such changes were typically made at the behest of, or with the explicit approval of, the local bodies. In some cases, the legislature forced local bodies to change their rules or makeup to comply with the federal Voting Rights Act.The stakes have been highest in Wake County, where four Republicans on the seven-member commission were swept out of office in November. In the current system, the seven commissioners must live in one of seven districts, but they run countywide. Senator Barefoot’s bill expanded the board from seven members to nine, each to be elected by voters within new districts.Senator Barefoot noted that one of the new commissioners, Matt Calabria, had won his countywide race by a wide margin but lost his own district.“This bill ensures this kind of injustice will no longer occur,” Mr. Barefoot said.In a recent House committee meeting packed with supporters and detractors, James P. West, the commission chairman, called the bill “extreme” and asked that residents be given the chance to vote on it. Republicans on the committee later voted down an amendment that would have put the idea to a local referendum.In Greensboro, where registered Democrats outnumber Republicans by more than two to one, the proposal to change the City Council has prompted hundreds of residents to turn out at community meetings. Sponsored by Senator Trudy Wade, a Republican, the bill would replace five Council districts and three at-large seats with seven newly drawn districts. It would also limit the mayor to voting in tiebreakers and a few other tasks.Greensboro is in Guilford County, one of the 40 in the state where officials, under the Voting Rights Act, were previously required to submit changes to voting laws to the Department of Justice to ensure they would not adversely affect minority voters. The United States Supreme Court struck down those provisions of the act in 2013.In Greensboro, as in Trinity, elections are nonpartisan, but suspicions are running high. “I think it’s an agenda that the Republicans have,” said Yvonne Johnson, a Democratic member of the Council.Senator Wade could not be reached for comment, but has told local news media that she was responding to concerns of the business community. The News & Record, Greensboro’s daily newspaper, has been hawking a T-shirt on its website based on the Gadsden flag from the Revolutionary War era, with a message more recently co-opted by the conservative Tea Party.“Don’t tread on me,” it says, along with a picture of a coiled snake. “Raleigh, let Greensboro be!”