PATRAS, Greece —  Alexis Tsipras, Greece’s prime minister until he resigned last month to call new elections, was campaigning in this port city recently, in many ways looking like the same charismatic young politician who swept into office only eight months ago.He bounded to the stage in an open square, tieless as usual, his shirt sleeves rolled up. And he was again asking Greek voters to say “no,” as he did earlier this year when he urged them to reject the strict terms the country’s creditors were offering to bail this country out once more.But much has changed for Mr. Tsipras since he was first elected in January, not least that he ended up reluctantly supporting the same kinds of creditor-required budget cuts and tax increases he came to power opposing. So heading into Sunday’s national election, he is focused not so much on austerity and the wrongheadedness of the policies imposed on Greece from outside and much more on a homegrown problem: corruption.A vote for Mr. Tsipras’s Syriza party, he argued, was a no vote against the old ways, when government served the interests of the oligarchs and politicians made themselves rich. A vote to return him to power, he suggested, was a no vote against the parties that had brought Greece to its financial knees.“Don’t allow those you kicked out the door in January to come back through the window now,” he urged. The crowd cheered, but some of his supporters noted that attendance was not quite what it was last January, when Mr. Tsipras won 36 percent of the vote, enough for Syriza, then proudly leftist, to lead a coalition government.Mr. Tsipras, 41, has lost none of his charm, and as a politician whose party was never in power before January, he still appeals to many Greeks who want to overhaul the government. That is a card he is playing relentlessly these days.But the bruising bailout negotiations and the fallout that split his party after he agreed to terms imposed by Greece’s creditors have left Mr. Tsipras in an awkward position. He is being attacked by the right for being inexperienced and by former far left elements of his own party, who say that his ultimate acceptance of the bailout terms was nothing less than treachery and a sign that he is unreliable. His platform is now less radical, focused on enacting the changes required by creditors in a way that will minimize pain to ordinary Greeks and hold elites and special interests accountable.During his last campaign, he roused a population beaten down by years of depression-like conditions, including an unemployment rate of 27 percent. He called Greece’s creditors “criminals” and pledged never to accept more austerity measures.Today, facing the voters again after a very public metamorphosis, he admits errors, including having underestimated the creditors’ resolve.He remains proud, he says, of having tried and he argues that his experience this year is good preparation for the years ahead.“The people want a prime minister who speaks the truth and admits his mistakes,” he said at a debate this week where he squared off against his leading opponent, Evangelos Meimarakis, a longtime member of the center-right party, New Democracy.But whether his pitch will resonate enough to win him the election remains in question.Most experts had expected an easy win for Mr. Tsipras, who, at first, appeared to have held on to his popularity despite having to back track on his promises. When faced with numerous Syriza members of Parliament who would not vote for the needed legislation, Mr. Tsipras called for new elections. In July his approval ratings were more than 60 percent, but that seems long ago now.These days, most polls (though polls in Greece have a bad track record) say it will be a close race and Mr. Tsipras is likely to fail in his bid to cleanse his party of the far-left fringe and come back with a stronger majority.“The card he is playing is to admit he got a lot wrong and convince people that is part of the process,” said Nick Malkoutzis, the editor of the economic and political analysis website MacroPolis. “But he may have a problem with trust after the erratic handling of the bailout. He was the prime minister, not a teenager who was handed the keys to the car, and he made some serious mistakes.”Nonetheless, there is no disputing that Mr. Tsipras, who began in politics as a student organizer, is at ease in the political arena. In this week’s American-style television debate, Mr. Tsipras delivered a forceful, steady performance, smiling and joking often, his ill-fitting suit occasionally bunching up on his arms.In contrast, Mr. Meimarakis, 61, seethed with anger at several points, first arguing that he would deliver a stable coalition government, but then growing so annoyed with Mr. Tsipras that he declared that he had no intention of working with him and that he could not “stand listening to him.”Mr. Meimarakis was considered only a temporary leader of the party, but his Everyman talk (and his tendency to swear) has proved more popular than expected. He has argued that continuing Mr. Tsipras’s education would be much too costly for the country.As he campaigns, Mr. Tsipras says that his Syriza party has already made a difference, for example by creating emergency subsidies for families without work who have run out of benefits. But his critics on the right say Mr. Tsipras’s thinking remains too grounded in his leftist ideology and his critics on the left, many of whom have formed a breakaway party advocating a return from the euro to the drachma, are concentrating much of their campaigning on flaying Mr. Tsipras.