The strict terms of the deal imposed on Greece by fellow members of the eurozone on Sunday inspired hundreds of thousands of comments on social networks deriding the agreement as the equivalent of a coup against the left-wing government of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras.As Ashifa Kassam reported for The Guardian, the global trend #ThisIsACoup appears to have started with socialjustice activists in Barcelona, where the term was used on Sunday by Ada Colau, the city’s new mayor, who rose to prominence in protests against evictions.
            Grecia quiere estar en Europa, quiere pagar deuda y negociar. Pero quiere tb respeto, democracia y DDHH. Yo estoy con Grecia #thisIsACoup Pablo Iglesias, the leader of Spain’s anti-austerity movement, Podemos, followed, as Anne-Marie Tomchak of BBC Trending noted.
#Greekment is the number 1 Twitter trend in Greece right now. #ThisIsACoup was trending globally with 390,000 tweets
https://t.co/jLM35z6HG9 Mr. Iglesias, who had campaigned with Mr. Tsipras in Athens in January before Syriza, his party, won the Greek elections, used the tag with a comment pledging “All of our support to the Greek people and government against the Mafia bosses.”
            Todo nuestro apoyo al pueblo griego y a su gobierno frente a los mafiosos #ThisIsACoup His party later described the deal — in which the Greek government agreed to give up power over large issues, like putting state assets into a trust fund to pay the debt, but also small ones, like the number of pharmacies per square mile — as a coup that effectively made Greece into “a protectorate.”
            Podemos: Deals makes Greece a protectorate

#Greece
https://t.co/sHJoz9Y2d2 The Twitter trend was then picked up by Greek commentators and embraced by sympathetic observers around the world, including Paul Krugman, the Nobel laureate in economics and New York Times Op-Ed columnist.
            We don't want the Greek word "EUROPE" to represent this mess. #ThisIsACoup #greekment 
            Ammended: The Founding Principles of the Eurpopean Union 
#ThisIsACoup pic.twitter.com/SavUg1fQ6u 
            Münchau "The best thing that can be said of the weekend is the brutal honesty of those perpetrating this regime change" #ThisIsACoup #Greece 
            Killing the European Project http://t.co/WN93wXEBHl via @NytimesKrugman #thisisacoup “The trending hashtag ThisIsACoup is exactly right,” Mr. Krugman wrote on his blog. “This goes beyond harsh into pure vindictiveness, complete destruction of national sovereignty, and no hope of relief.”“In a way, the economics have almost become secondary,” he added. “But still, let’s be clear: what we’ve learned these past couple of weeks is that being a member of the eurozone means that the creditors can destroy your economy if you step out of line.”The theme was echoed by Yanis Varoufakis, who stepped down as Greece’s finance minister last week, comparing the debt deal to “the 1967 coup d’état” in Athens in an interview with Australia’s state broadcaster on Monday. “The choice of weapon used in order to bring down democracy then was the tanks; well, this time it was the banks,” Mr. Varoufakis said. “The banks were used by foreign powers to take over the government. In ’67, they used the tanks to take over the government. The difference is now that this time they’re taking over all remaining public property.”Paul Mason, the economics editor of Britain’s Channel 4 News, noted that the phrase was used with particular intensity in European countries where austerity is unpopular, and across Latin America.
            The #ThisIsACoup meme burned bright in the BRICS as well as Euro periphery. LatAm watching Syriza's fate intently pic.twitter.com/oAZsK4x3Ua Suspicions that Europe’s centrist and right-wing governments were working to undermine the “coalition of the radical left” that now leads Greece were further fueled by a comment from the finance minister of Slovakia, who compared Mr. Tsipras’s election to the short-lived Prague Spring in Czechoslovakia in 1968, which was extinguished by Soviet tanks.
            Slovak Fin Min deletes tweet admitting that deal imposed on #Greece was punishment for elections result #ThisIsACoup pic.twitter.com/qG6qRMsmsk The opposite case was made by James Kirkup, who suggested in a column for The Telegraph that the rejection of austerity measures in last week’s Greek referendum did not mean the new deal was undemocratic:Although much of the anger was aimed at Germany, the largest economy in the eurozone, which also holds a very large portion of the Greek debt, a spokesman for the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, called the comparison to a coup inappropriate.
            Germany’s tactic is to demolish a left solution from within — the only solution is popular struggle. https://t.co/Jug3FnlC7V #ThisIsACoup 
            Merkel spokesman @regsprecher rejects #ThisIsACoup hashtag, saying it isn't appropriate for #Greecedeal.        The popularity of the hashtag also resonated in Egypt, where supporters of the military takeover in 2013 had lambasted the international media for daring to describe the forcible removal of power of an elected president by the army commander as a coup.
            Brussels, you're doing this wrong. You need to get the green lazers out and start putting '#NotACoup' signs on EU buildings. #Greece #Egypt 
            33 million people no less #NotACoup https://t.co/wF4ylV13vE 