BANGKOK —  Myanmar’s military flexed its muscle on Thursday, blocking moves to rescind its veto power in Parliament and refusing to ease a rule that helps prevent Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the opposition leader and Nobel laureate, from eventually becoming president.The votes in Parliament, although not unexpected, were a reassertion of military power in Myanmar, which was ruled for five decades by the armed forces but has been experimenting in recent years with a more open and democratic system.Under the Constitution, which was written by a junta, the military controls a quarter of the seats in Parliament, enough to block any amendments to the charter.One vote on Thursday rejected a proposal to allow the Constitution to be amended with 70 percent of votes in Parliament instead of the 75 percent required now, which would have effectively removed the military’s veto.Lawmakers also struck down a motion to amend a clause in the Constitution that bars anyone whose spouse or children have “allegiance to a foreign power” from becoming president or vice president. Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s husband, who died in 1999, was a British citizen, and so are their two sons.She would have remained ineligible even if the vote had passed, however, because the proposal would have removed only the clause relating to a candidate’s spouse.The votes on Thursday do not preclude Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s party, the National League for Democracy, from winning an election scheduled for this year. The Nobel laureate remains popular in the country, and her name — as well as that of her father, Aung San, the country’s independence hero — remains the most recognizable in the land.Members of her party said after the vote that their campaign to elect Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi as president was not over.“We expected we would lose this vote,” said U Win Htein, a member of the party’s central executive committee. “We will continue campaigning within Parliament and outside the Parliament. At the very least, we will be showing people we are trying to amend a Constitution that they don’t want.”Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, who holds a parliamentary seat, took part in Thursday’s votes.Analysts believe that her party could have significant bargaining power in the days after the election, which is expected in late October or November. Parliament selects the president and vice presidents after the election, setting the stage for political haggling between the opposition and the military establishment.Critics say Myanmar’s military has been out of sync with the democratization of the country. Military commanders have begun offensives against a number of armed ethnic forces, even as peace talks have continued. Those talks now seem unlikely to produce a national cease-fire that the government of President Thein Sein has been seeking.On Wednesday, a military representative in Parliament defended the army’s prominent role in the country in a speech accompanied by a slide show of tanks and heavy artillery.“It is necessary to keep the Myanmar military in the legislative and administrative sectors in order to protect and stand by the country in its time of need,” news outlets in Myanmar quoted the lawmaker, Tin Soe, as saying.The reassertion of military power has given rise to pessimism among those who had hoped for a swifter emergence of civilian control over the country.“Judging from the votes today, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi should rethink whether she should contest the elections at all,” a political commentator, U Yan Myo Thein, said Thursday. “There’s no hope that she will become president.”