It is rare that a contemporary political state of affairs perfectly corresponds with a classical literary one — when the contours of the two align so entirely that not only does the latter help explain the former, but the new situation, with all its messy contingencies, seems to follow the carefully wrought logic of its aesthetic predecessor with such precision as to appear like a manifestation, or symptom, of it. Yet this is the case (I would argue) with the economic imbroglio between Germany and Greece.Economics, etymologically speaking, is a Greek invention. The word comes from the Greek oikos, which means “house” or “dwelling.” At the basis of all economics is the practice of keeping one’s house in order. This is what virtually all Greek drama is about: the attempt to manage domestic affairs, whether “domestic” be understood at the scale of one household, or of a family spanning several generations (the house of Oedipus or Atreus, for instance), or of the literal stones and mortar of a home — the attempt to quell its rebellions from within, fend off attacks from without, keep it self-contained, autonomous, intact. What lends the drama to the equation is the fact that this attempt invariably fails. Take Aeschylus’ Oresteian trilogy. The patriarch Agamemnon is murdered by his wife, and the ensuing household struggle escalates into affairs of state and even conflict between gods. One oikos opens up into another — Greek oikoi are never closed. If it’s not present violence blowing them wide open, it’s past acts (as she approaches Agamemnon’s house, Cassandra shrieks that its very walls are spilling dreadful histories, “Remnants of bodies hacked / And murdered children’s bones”), private intimacies unfolding into public knowledge — the whole process driven by an inexpungeable reserve of guilt.That guilt has its base in matters of the hearth — in other words, in economics — is echoed in the English “guilt,” a word that also retains links to gold. But it is German that is most attuned to this connection: In this language, the concepts of “guilt” and “debt” are served by the same word, Schuld. To be guilty, schuldig, is to be in debt, and vice versa. Joyce, a writer obsessed with economic processes, embeds this word in the central episode of “Finnegans Wake,” which turns on a blackmailer attempting to extract money from a patriarch entrusted with a city’s cash box, who, harboring a guilty secret, wears “billowing” (or bill owing) clothes and an “overgoat under his schulder.” Kafka builds his entire oeuvre around Schuld. Not only does the word recur with astonishing frequency throughout his work, but he continually compresses the economic and moral aspects of the term. In his “Letter to My Father,” he pins his obsessive outpourings of shame (Schuldbewusstsein) to his monetary debt to his father, to whom he is able to feel grateful “only as a beggar is.” In the English translation, one paragraph ends with two clauses: “On every side I was to blame. I was in your debt.” But in the original, one clause alone suffices: “Von allen Seiten her kam ich in Deine Schuld.”This echo in German of a Greek theme or relation is exemplary: Germany has always been particularly indebted to Greece. Indeed, from a cultural point of view, it could be argued that Germany more or less created itself as a modern state by plugging into vast reserves of Greekness. The poet Hölderlin reinvented his native Swabia by remolding it as mythical Hellenic Patmos. Heidegger elaborated his theories from the writings of Parmenides, Anaximander and Aristotle. Germany, in the best instances, has in return read Greece back to itself — as witnessed by the work of archaeologists such as Schliemann, who interpreted the findings at Troy and Mycenae. But the demands now being forced on Greece by the German government, the requisition of the former’s civic cash box on bill-owing technicalities placed on its “schulder” by far-from-­trustworthy patriarchs, represent a worst instance, founded (it seems) on a willful misinterpretation of the nature of indebtedness and culpability. Greece is schuldig by definition, since it owes. But its debt, crippling though it is to the Hellenic household, is miniature compared with that of a nation that, within living memory, first (during occupation) plundered Greece’s gold, then (after armistice) received monumental sums of unearned credit.The great lesson of Greek literature (as Oedipus learns to his cost) is simply: You are guilty. Before you’ve even done anything, guilt is the precondition of your being. The house of Germany is indebted, more than most; it takes no Cassandra to spot the murdered children’s bones spilling from its walls. Its leaders, having profited from an open economy, are imposing upon Greece a spurious closed one tailored to suit their own ends. From a literary point of view, it must be concluded that Angela Merkel and her associates are bad readers. And this matters: Nations are symbolic constructs, mechanisms for regulating citizens’ lives according to certain axes of meaning. So is democracy.In the Oresteian trilogy, the inexorable guilt (of Agamemnon, who sacrificed his daughter; of Clytemnestra, who murdered him in revenge; of Orestes, who killed her as a riposte to that; and so on, backward and forward for generations) gives rise to a series of claims and counterclaims that get resolved in what is effectively the West’s first civic trial, presided over by Athena. The task, for her and the citizen-jury she appoints, is not to work out who is right (all parties’ arguments are good), but rather to come up with an arrangement that can set all these contesting demands in some kind of balance that accommodates all sides. In so doing, she founds democracy. The groundbreaking event takes place in Athens. That the current Athenian parliament’s own resolutions are being struck down by Berlin-mandated bureaucrats makes the Greek citizenry’s long-running slogan “Error 404 — Democracy Not Found” even truer than they might realize.