The hit musical “Hamilton” has excited critics and audiences with its hip-hop exploration of America’s revolutionary era. Now educators and philanthropists are hoping it will excite high school students as well.The Rockefeller Foundation and the producers have agreed to finance a program to bring 20,000 New York City 11th graders, all from schools with high percentages of students from low-income families, to see “Hamilton” at a series of matinees beginning next spring and running through 2017. The lead producer, Jeffrey Seller, said he was planning to continue the program after that time in New York City and then on the road once the show — a bio-musical about Alexander Hamilton with Hispanic and black actors playing the founding fathers — begins its expected touring life.The Rockefeller Foundation president, Judith Rodin, said that her organization had committed $1.5 million to subsidize student tickets and to develop educational materials that will help students contextualize the show.“Here’s a story that talks about American history and the ideals of American democracy, and it features an immigrant who is impoverished initially and shows through perseverance and grit what he can achieve, in a vernacular that speaks to young people, written by a product of New York public education,” Ms. Rodin said. “Could there possibly be a better combination in terms of speaking to students?”Lin-Manuel Miranda, the creator and star of “Hamilton,” said that he was frequently asked at the stage door how the show, which is both costly to attend and often sold out, could be made more accessible to young people, and he said finding a way to do that has been a priority for him. Mr. Miranda, 35, is a graduate of the Hunter College elementary and high schools for gifted students in New York City.“If we can excite curiosity in students, there’s no telling what can happen next,” he said. “Not to say we’re going to make 1,300 history majors or 1,300 musical theater writers every time we do the show, but hopefully they will take away how much Hamilton did with his life in the time that he had.”There are multiple other efforts to expose children and adolescents to Broadway with their families, arts programs and schools, but the “Hamilton” program is the largest for a single production and the first to so fully involve the school district. Charlotte St. Martin, the president of the Broadway League, called the plan “unprecedented,” and Victoria Bailey, the executive director of the Theater Development Fund, said, “I can’t think of another Broadway production that has taken on an effort of this size and scale.”“It’s actually kind of imperative that this happen — that they figure out a way to get young people in — because it’s going to be a while before there would be access another way,” Ms. Bailey said. Her own organization, a nonprofit that strives to encourage diverse audiences to see theater, brought 640 high school students to see the Off Broadway run of “Hamilton” at the Public Theater. Ms. Bailey said, “We had students who were in tears because they felt like they were American for the first time.”Mr. Seller, who announced the student program at a news conference on Tuesday, has agreed to sell the tickets for $70 each — about half the $139 current average ticket price for the show. The foundation will pay $60 toward each ticket, and students will be charged $10 — the denomination that bears Hamilton’s face — because school officials have advised that paying a nominal admission fee encourages students to take such activities more seriously.Mr. Seller said that about 17,000 students wouldattend student-only Wednesday matinees, supplemented by educational programming and meetings with cast members at the theater. Another 3,000 would join regular ticket-buyers at other Wednesday matinees, with the educational component presented in their classrooms. He said the student performances would earn back their cost, but would not generate a profit.The musical’s language and content will not be toned down or altered for a student audience, Mr. Seller said. The lyrics for “Hamilton” include a few instances of profanity, and the plot includes an extramarital affair, two deaths by dueling, and, of course, violent resistance to a repressive government authority (Britain). Educators love the show because it is also a passionate civics lesson and a de facto love letter to the American experiment, with rap battles over federalism and foreign policy and a paean to democracy sung by an actor portraying George Washington.“It’s extremely appropriate — you’re not fighting a revolution and saying ‘please’ and ‘thank you’ to everyone,” said Carmen Fariña, the New York City schools chancellor and a history buff who read “Alexander Hamilton,” the biography by Ron Chernow that inspired the musical, before she went to see it to assess whether it might work for students.Although attendance will be optional for students, Ms. Fariña said she hoped that by bringing students to the theater, “we will begin to talk about history as something alive and exciting.” But she said she saw lessons for Broadway, as well. “I think we need to give a message to the arts community that the arts are for everyone,” she said.The curriculum will be put together by the nonprofit Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History, which plans to create a website with copies of the primary documents that undergird the book and lyrics, and teaching materials about Hamilton and the founding fathers. Students will be invited to create and share their own artistic responses to Hamilton’s life.“The first time I saw the show, I was lamenting that the audience was all your usual theatergoers,” said the institute’s executive director, Lesley S. Herrmann, who has seen “Hamilton” three times. She said she would count the project as a success “if we’ve inspired a young generation to take history seriously, to get personally involved in it, and someday to serve the country as Hamilton did.”