ALBANY —  After 21 years dominating Albany through his stoicism and unyielding will, Sheldon Silver met his downfall, appropriately enough, after an uncomfortable silence.Late on Monday afternoon, Mr. Silver, the longtime speaker of the New York Assembly, addressed scores of his Democratic colleagues who had grimly gathered in a corner conference room in the State Capitol. The mood was as serious as the charges he faces: that he exploited his office to obtain millions of dollars in payoffs.Mr. Silver spoke for less than 10 minutes before offering to leave the room, to help facilitate a freer discussion.No one asked him to stay.So it was that Mr. Silver, one of the most powerful men in New York, and suddenly the face of Albany’s continuing corruption crisis, shuffled out.That exit foreshadowed his fall from grace — a six-day, slow-motion toppling that began with his arrest on Jan. 22 and culminated on Tuesday evening, when Democrats said Mr. Silver would be replaced for the betterment of a chamber repeatedly buffeted by prosecutions, convictions and sexual harassment scandals.Mr. Silver’s arrest has shocked New York State politics, upending a time-tested and oft-criticized political arrangement in which the governor, the Senate majority leader and Mr. Silver would decide the state’s finances, important policies and major projects and plans. Mr. Silver’s prosecutor, Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, has castigated Albany’s “three men in a room” system, under which Mr. Silver thrived, as a disgrace to democracy.Interviews with more than a dozen legislators indicate that it was a similarly idealistic new wave of Assembly members who helped galvanize opposition to Mr. Silver, prodded a loyal old guard and cleared the way for an election of a new speaker and, they hoped, a new start.“It’s a transformational moment,” said Assemblyman Michael Blake, a Bronx Democrat who was newly elected in November. “Once in a political lifetime, once in a generation, you have an opportunity to set a new direction.”Such sentiments, of course, do little to explain the somewhat tortured week of machinations and deliberations that led to Mr. Silver’s finally accepting his rank-and-file’s decision, a process punctuated by fast-shifting alliances and fast-disintegrating declarations of support; an ill-fated gambit to hang onto power; long hours of group discussion and cubed cheese; and an inglorious climax in which Mr. Silver, Learlike, walked into an elevator and out into the frigid night.Lawmakers AwakenedJust after midnight on Jan. 22, The New York Times published an article online reporting Mr. Silver’s impending arrest, sending text messages flying through Albany and rousing lawmakers from their beds.“I was dead sleeping,” said Assemblyman Keith L. T. Wright, a longtime Democratic lawmaker from Harlem, who rooms with Assemblyman Jeffrion L. Aubry of Queens when they are in the capital. “We started talking about it at 3 in the morning. We got absolutely no sleep.”Assemblywoman Amy Paulin, a Democrat from Westchester County, had her cellphone turned off. When she learned about the arrest in the morning, she rushed over to the Capitol. Shortly afterward, she attended a long-scheduled meeting of Democratic assemblywomen that the speaker had been expected to address.Some there were already invoking divine intervention: Assemblywoman Carmen E. Arroyo of the Bronx asked for a moment of prayer on Mr. Silver’s behalf.Judy Rapfogel, his longtime chief of staff, fought back emotion. Her face ashen, speaking through tears, people in the room recalled, Ms. Rapfogel alluded to how her own husband — William E. Rapfogel, a longtime associate of Mr. Silver who pleaded guilty last year to stealing more than $1 million from the Metropolitan Council on Jewish Poverty — was in prison.And now this. “It has been a horrible year for me,” she said.Later that Thursday, stunned Assembly Democrats caucused, a regular gathering that Mr. Silver normally led. “Innocent till proven guilty” was the mantra. But as details about the federal complaint against Mr. Silver trickled out, lawmakers began to contemplate a previously unheard-of concept: an Assembly without Mr. Silver in charge.“I’ve been here 12 years,” said Assemblyman Daniel J. O’Donnell, who represents the Upper West Side of Manhattan. “He’s the only speaker that I’ve known.”At another point on Jan. 22, a smaller group of lawmakers discussed the criminal complaint in the Legislative Office Building across the street from the Capitol. One of them was Assemblyman Todd Kaminsky, a freshman Democrat from Long Island. His previous job was as a public-corruption prosecutor for the United States attorney’s office in Brooklyn, where his targets included former Representative Michael G. Grimm, a Republican.Mr. Kaminsky, according to several people in the room, was asked his expert assessment.“How bad is it?” one lawmaker asked.“It’s really, really bad,” Mr. Kaminsky replied.One of the people in the room recalled: “It was like a bomb hit the place.”That same day, a crowd of Democrats, including many of the longest-serving members, gathered to proclaim that they remained united behind Mr. Silver.“We have every confidence that the speaker is going to continue to fill his role with distinction,” said Assemblyman Joseph D. Morelle of the Rochester area, the majority leader.It would be the last such display — and a high-water mark in Mr. Silver’s effort to hold his post.No Special PrayerOn Friday, lawmakers were back in their districts, and local newspapers across the state ran editorials demanding the speaker’s resignation.On the Lower East Side of Manhattan, Mr. Silver went about his day. That afternoon, he had a haircut; the next morning, attending Sabbath services at his synagogue, he declined offers to have a special prayer said on his behalf, according to The New York Post.“No need,” the paper quoted him as saying. “Not now.”Lawmakers were due back in Albany on Monday. Late Sunday night, news surfaced about how Mr. Silver planned to hang on to their support: He and a group of senior lawmakers had hammered out a plan under which five allies of Mr. Silver would handle his duties, but he would keep his title.The “Gang of Five” plan landed like a bag of anvils.As lawmakers returned to the Capitol on Monday, members were denouncing the arrangement. Some saw it as a way for Mr. Silver to continue to pull the strings while merely appearing to cede control. Others fumed that they had learned of it first from news reports.Ms. Paulin, of Westchester, met with more than a dozen other lawmakers from the suburbs — typically a less-powerful group in a body dominated by New York City Democrats.That group, instantly nicknamed the Suburban Caucus, called for Mr. Silver’s ouster.Others lawmakers came to the same conclusion: Just before noon on Monday, Mr. Wright, of Harlem — an influential figure whose demeanor mixes humor and gravitas — issued a statement calling for Mr. Silver to resign:“Without a complete separation of Sheldon Silver from the speakership and its powers, and a real reform of our conference,” he wrote, “we will as a body remain mired in the swamp of dysfunction and chaos.”Secluded in his legislative office, Mr. Silver and several allies discussed resistance to the Gang of Five plan, and delayed a planned meeting of the full Democratic conference.Walking slowly to the Capitol, Mr. Silver entered the large corner conference room reserved for Assembly Democrats, who hold a huge numeric advantage over Republicans. No aides were admitted. Some lawmakers hugged Mr. Silver as he entered; others shook his hand.He tried to insert routine into a meeting that was anything but: At Monday conference meetings, Mr. Silver typically announces which lawmakers are celebrating a birthday in the coming week. And so it was that on Monday, with his fate hanging in the balance, he wished a happy birthday to any member celebrating one.Then he turned to the case against him. “I’m going to beat this,” he said, according to lawmakers in the room.He offered to let his colleagues debate his future without him. There was a silence, and Mr. Silver headed for the door.As he walked out, some legislators applauded.But Assemblyman Joseph R. Lentol, a Brooklyn Democrat, said he felt Mr. Silver’s resignation was a foregone conclusion the moment he left the room.“If I was in a similar predicament, and I never hope to be, I want all the members to look me in the eye and tell me to go,” Mr. Lentol said. “He really left his fate to the members.”Lost ConfidenceNot long after Mr. Silver left the conference room on Monday, the Assembly’s longest-serving member, Richard N. Gottfried of Manhattan, told his colleagues that the current situation was untenable, and that Mr. Silver needed to step down.“It was heartbreaking to say that about someone who has been an extraordinary friend and ally, and a force for almost everything I care about in public policy,” Mr. Gottfried recalled on Wednesday.Newer members were even more insistent.“The core question was what is best for the institution and best for the people,” Mr. Blake, the freshman from the Bronx, said. “And whether you had been there one, 10, 20 years, the collective understanding of what was best was to move forward.”Five hours later, the lawmakers emerged. Mr. Morelle went to Mr. Silver’s office to inform him that he had lost the confidence of his fellow Democrats.After another day’s discussion about more practical concerns, the final plan was announced Tuesday night: Mr. Silver would be replaced next week; a new speaker would be elected on Feb. 10.In a sign of the influence of the conference’s younger members, several of those vying to succeed Mr. Silver signaled on Wednesday that they would heed those newer lawmakers’ concerns.Mr. Lentol promised to “liberalize the operations” of the Assembly and allow junior members “to fully participate” in the legislative process. Assemblyman Carl E. Heastie, a leading contender from the Bronx, vowed to “increase accountability and transparency.” Assemblywoman Catherine Nolan, of Queens, promised an “appreciation for suggestions and reforms.”But for many, the first reform had already come.Just before entering the Capitol elevator on his way out on Tuesday night, Mr. Silver, the master of the sotto-voce negotiation, suddenly raised his voice after repeated questions from reporters about his future and his looming departure from the speaker’s office.“I will not hinder the process,” Mr. Silver, 70, barked, louder than reporters could recall him ever speaking.And with that, he stepped into the elevator and the door closed.