“Do you mind if I have a cigarette?” Patricia Field asked, though the deep gravel of her voice indicated that the question was rhetorical. She was sitting in the basement office of her eponymous boutique at 306 Bowery, wearing a black tank-top, dark capri pants and heavy blue mascara that complemented her trademark vermilion hair: a punk knockout at 73.Three days earlier, the “Sex and the City” costumer had made a startling announcement: She will close her store early next year, a half-century after opening her first shop. No more bedazzled hoodies. No more rhinestone bustiers.Obituaries flooded Twitter, lamenting the end of an era. “NYC won’t be the same,” wrote the former club kid Michael Alig. “I am going to have NOTHING TO WEAR,” said the British D.J. Jodie Harsh. Jezebel ran the dire headline: “Patricia Field Is Closing Her New York Storefront & I Don’t Think I Can Go On.”It seemed like a familiar story: another countercultural bastion, gentrified into oblivion. Was the East Village finally — finally — dead?But before her devotees start grousing about rising rents and luxury condos, Ms. Field would like to clear a few things up.First of all, she doesn’t pay rent. “I own this, and I am selling this real estate,” she said, as her two white poodles, Sultana and Bootie, curled up on her desk. She acquired the first chunk of the property in 2000, “when there was nothing here,” and then expanded into an adjacent building a dozen years later. She said she was selling for a healthy profit, though she declined to give figures.She also insisted that she was not in a cash crunch. “Financially, I could stay here and operate,” she said. And she is not one to bemoan gentrification, saying: “I don’t feel like there’s any hope in ever going against the tide. I believe you have to get on your surfboard and ride it.”Her decision, she said, was a matter of personal privilege, though some would call it cultural hara-kiri. Thanks to “Sex and the City,” Ms. Field has been in high demand for television and film projects, among them “Ugly Betty,” “The Devil Wears Prada” and, most recently, the TV Land series “Younger,” for which she is a consultant.All that has taken her away from her retail operation, which she said has suffered from her absences with unpaid bills and depleted inventories. “I’m simply no longer interested in devoting the time necessary to operating this place,” she said. “I wish I could, because I love it. But it’s either me or the store.”She added: “I also want to make a little room for a swim.”To the global audience that associates her with Carrie Bradshaw’s Manolo Blahniks or Miranda Priestly’s designer sunglasses, it may be news that Ms. Field is, first and foremost, a punk den mother. But that is the role she has played with unflappable precision for decades, even as her store has changed locations and the street fashion surrounding her has metamorphosed many times over.Her “bazaar,” as she likes to call it, overflows with the outré: mirrored T-shirts, tutus, Venetian masks, painted trench coats by the artist Scooter LaForge (“We’re really into wearable art right now,” said a cross-dressing employee called Leo GuGu), foam backpacks in the shape of monsters. A catwalk is decorated with a Keith Haring figurine; downstairs, in what was formerly Ms. Field’s bedroom, is a wig bar and a salon.Ms. Field, who neither sews nor sketches, is above all a canny spotter of talent, often giving fledgling designers their first exposure to the market by selling their products at high and low prices, no matter how unwieldy or bizarre.“She absolutely plays an important role in designing, curating, giving us advice,” said Rachel Singer, who makes pompom knitwear under the label Sparkle Princess. “We talk about pricing. We talk about fabrication.”Apart from “Sex” fans stopping in for custom gold-plated “Carrie” necklaces, her patrons are eager experimentalists, en route to nightclubs or drag careers or Halloween parades, to whom the magenta “Patricia Field” signature on the front window signals permission to let the freak flag fly.But the outcry over the closing goes beyond buying and selling. To the ever-replenishing demimonde, the store has functioned as a makeshift community center, hangout and even pickup joint.Of its former location on East Eighth Street, the drag performer Lady Bunny said: “We would stop in to use the bathroom or shop or talk to the transsexuals at the makeup counter. You lived in the East Village for the scene and went into the West Village for sex, so we were frequently going back and forth, and Pat’s spot was right in the middle.”Over the decades, her regulars have included rockers like Patti Smith and Debbie Harry, pop stars like Lady Gaga and Miley Cyrus, and drag stars like RuPaul, who still stops by on his bike during the summers. Another habitué, Missy Elliott, recently bought six pairs of Thai boxing shorts for her backup dancers. (“I love Missy,” Ms. Field said.)Presiding over the circus, Ms. Field is as much of a landmark as her emporium, at once nurturing and blasé. “Pat was much more than just a boss,” Lady Bunny said. “Pat is one of us.”Patricia Field was 24 when she opened her first shop, called Pants Pub, in 1966. A crammed 30-by-12-foot boutique on Washington Place, smack in the middle of the New York University campus, it specialized in Mod styles: tight sweaters, white go-go boots.Her partner, in retail and in life, was her girlfriend, Jo-Ann Salvucci, who had been working as a lab technician in Philadelphia. “She was very straight-looking in 1966,” Ms. Salvucci said of Ms. Field. “She wasn’t as avant-garde as she is now. She went into the market, she was very aggressive. She knew what she was after.”Ms. Field inherited her entrepreneurial know-how from her parents, who owned a dry-cleaning store. Growing up in Queens, she said: “I would go in there in the morning before school, have a coffee and a roll with my mom. She would say, ‘See, this is cashmere,’ or ‘This is silk.’”She learned glamour from her three aunts, who took her to department stores in Union Square while her mother worked (her father died when she was 8), and from Hollywood stars like Ava Gardner, whom she ogled in movie magazines.She studied government and philosophy at N.Y.U., where a professor, Sidney Hook, said in a lecture, “You don’t have to be a shoemaker to know that the shoe hurts your foot.” He was talking about democracy, but Ms. Field made it the cornerstone of her fashion ethos, which is nothing if not democratic. (She later designed products for Payless and Crocs.)Using $4,000 from a trust fund left by her father, plus an equal chip from Ms. Salvucci, the two women “built this little store with our own brawn and a Greek carpenter,” Ms. Field said. To keep afloat, she worked as a sportswear designer for a friend in the garment industry, while Ms. Salvucci minded the store, trying to persuade N.Y.U. students to try on bell-bottoms. (Ms. Field never cared much for the hippie look.)In 1971, they moved to the Eighth Street location, which was five times as large. The punk years gave Ms. Field her fashion identity, and her following. Patti Smith would come in wearing wrinkled pants and flip-flops and walk out with a Parisian chiffon blouse. “‘I bet you wonder where I wear all these clothes,’” Ms. Field recalled Ms. Smith saying. “‘I wear them onstage.’”Central to her clientele was the transgender community, which also made up a good portion of her staff. Before Amanda Lepore was an underground celebutante, she worked at the cosmetics stand starting in the mid-1990s.“We would have to watch for shoplifters, and sometimes the other kids would say, ‘Amanda’s not watching,’” Ms. Lepore said. But Ms. Field was a lenient boss. “She would say: ‘Don’t expect her to do anything. She’s in outer space,’” Ms. Lepore said. “I was around all those mirrors. I would just look at myself all day.”Meanwhile, Ms. Field made inroads into TV and movie work, beginning with the 1987 film “Lady Beware.” Diane Lane was playing a window dresser, and the real-life window dresser Candy Pratts Price recommended Ms. Field to design the costumes. Soon after, she went to Las Vegas to outfit the mob series “Crime Story.”Ms. Field threw herself into her new career. “I was feeling an itch,” she said.On the set of the 1995 film “Miami Rhapsody,” she met Sarah Jessica Parker, who brought her on to “Sex and the City” three years later. The show, to say the least, turned fashion, New York and Ms. Field’s career on their heads.It also changed the store, which was suddenly deluged with tourists expecting Carrie Bradshaw couture. “The buses would come in: 40 people, 50 people,” Ms. Field said. “They would try on a wig and take a picture.” It wasn’t her usual crowd, but she expanded her online business by selling Carrie-inspired name necklaces and studded belts.As her Hollywood career exploded, running the shop with any finesse became impossible, she said, and grooming new management apparently wasn’t her priority. Last year, she saw a big drop in business, and felt compelled to step in herself as the buyer. Not long after, she began negotiating the sale of the property to Thor Equities.“I don’t want to clean up the train wreck again,” she said at her office, now on her third or fourth cigarette. “I can walk away with my pockets full. And I deserve it.”A few hours later, a community still in shock from her announcement descended on the store for a “holiday extravaganza.” By 9 p.m., both floors were packed, with the crowd overflowing onto Bowery. Ms. Field dispensed hugs to longtime customers, while makeup artists gave free touch-ups. It was like an Irish wake crossed with “The Rocky Horror Picture Show.”“This is a tough cut,” a guest named Tommy Semosh, who works in publishing, said of the store’s impending closing (most likely in March). He was dressed in what he called “head-to-toe Patricia Field”: a surplus Russian military hat, mesh shirt with bullet holes, leopard-print pants.“I mean, Florent, Jackie 60, Bess,” he said, rattling off other vanished downtown staples. “My boyfriend was just saying the other day, ‘If Patricia Field closes, I’m leaving New York.’ It was almost like he was willing it.”At 10:30 p.m., Patricia Field, the boutique-cum-bacchanal, was still jumping. But Patricia Field, the chain-smoking septuagenarian who is just plain over it, was hiding out in the office downstairs. When no one was looking, she took Sultana and Bootie and slipped out the back door.