On the eve of the 39th birthday of Carl E. Heastie, then a little-known assemblyman from the Bronx, his campaign paid a $270 tab for “food” at Happy Valley, a Manhattan nightclub that did not sell food but was popular for its throbbing dance floor and caged go-go dancers in 2006.When Mr. Heastie’s BMW needed repairs, which was about every 10 weeks, he charged his campaign for the work, more than $30,000 over nine years. During that time, he also billed the state $51,200 in mileage reimbursements, money meant to cover repairs and other costs for trips to and from Albany.And when it came time to file reports on how his campaign had spent its money — a total of nearly $1.1 million since he took office in 2001 — Mr. Heastie often did not detail where that money had gone, according to an analysis of his financial disclosure records by The New York Times. His filings contained no explanation at all for who ultimately received nearly $150,000 from the campaign — mostly, he asserted, because the expense amounts were less than $50 and did not need to be itemized under state rules.Mr. Heastie’s campaign spending received little attention during his first 14 years in office. In February, however, he became Assembly speaker, one of the most powerful officials in state government. His sudden ascendance came as his colleagues scrambled to replace Sheldon Silver, the longtime speaker who had been arrested on federal corruption charges.Soon after becoming speaker, Mr. Heastie, a Democrat, pledged to restore trust in Albany by enacting ethics reform. But a close review of his campaign disclosure records suggests he has frequently used political donations to burnish his lifestyle.Mr. Heastie, 47, has not faced a serious challenger since taking office. In addition to keeping his car in good repair, his campaign donations have been used to cover expensive restaurant and nightclub bills, evenings in a karaoke bar with his staff, and tickets to football games at his Long Island alma mater.State law prohibits the use of campaign funds for personal purposes, and double-billing for vehicle expenses can also raise legal issues. A spokesman for Mr. Heastie said he had always followed the applicable laws and that all of the spending in question was for legitimate political purposes. The speaker has not been accused of any wrongdoing.Early last year, however, the Moreland Commission, which Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo convened in 2013 to investigate corruption in state politics, began to scrutinize Mr. Heastie’s campaign spending. He was among 28 lawmakers whose records the commission subpoenaed because they had spent at least $10,000 over a six-year period without identifying a recipient, either by simply omitting that information or by claiming the money was spent in increments below $50 that did not require itemization under state law.According to The Times’s review, during the years examined by the commission, the Heastie campaign did not identify a purpose or recipient for $97,910 in expenditures — nearly 10 times the commission’s threshold for review and an average of $1,360 a month.In a preliminary report, the commission declared that New York’s lax campaign finance rules made donations the equivalent of “legalized bribery,” because money from wealthy donors hoping to influence legislation could go toward “anything from clothing to cigars to stereo equipment.”Mr. Cuomo disbanded the commission last year before it could complete many of its investigations. Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, took over the commission’s files and vowed to pursue the leads it had developed. ‘On the Up and Up’About $30,000 of the unexplained spending by Mr. Heastie’s campaign came in the form of large payments to credit card accounts. For example, the campaign wrote an $8,203 check to American Express, describing its purpose in disclosure filings simply as “campaign account balance to zero.” About $17,000 more was paid to credit card companies with no explanations at all.Provided with a list of those payments by The Times, Mr. Heastie’s office acknowledged that the $30,000 had not been appropriately accounted for and said the campaign would file amended reports going further than the law requires.“Going forward, the speaker will set an example by going beyond the Board of Elections guidelines and itemize each expenditure, regardless of the amount, starting with the July filing,” the spokesman, Michael Whyland, wrote in a response.The campaign finance records of the Bronx Democratic Party, which Mr. Heastie controlled as the organization’s chairman from 2008 to earlier this year, were riddled with similar omissions. During the last six months of 2014, for instance, the party spent about $30,000 on what a vague note described as “various local vendors.”The party’s treasurer, Michael Benedetto, another assemblyman from the Bronx, said he believed the sum reflected the total spent using debit cards issued to himself, Mr. Heastie and the woman who served as executive director under Mr. Heastie. Mr. Benedetto said the party was working on amended filings that would detail where the money went.“We try to do everything on the up and up,” he said.A Garage RegularThe annual disclosure forms Mr. Heastie must file related to his personal finances show he has depended almost entirely on the $93,500 he earned as an assemblyman before becoming speaker. He has reported no significant investments and increasing credit card debt in recent years.One of the most frequent expenses paid by Mr. Heastie’s campaign has been the cost of fixing his personal car, currently a black BMW 328i.During his first five years in office, Mr. Heastie charged his campaign only for mileage costs. Then, in 2006, his campaign began to pay directly for auto repairs, most of them done by St. Ann’s Auto Repairs, a small garage near Mr. Heastie’s home. Over the next nine years, the campaign spent $30,000 on auto parts or repairs.Mr. Heastie has also billed the state for mileage on his car every year since taking office, collecting a total of $72,512 in reimbursements for driving 153,000 miles, an average of about 35 round trips from the Bronx to Albany a year. The state reimbursement rate, calculated by the Internal Revenue Service, is intended to cover all costs associated with operating a vehicle, including repairs, gas and insurance.Between the campaign’s repair payments and state mileage reimbursements, Mr. Heastie has billed taxpayers or his political donors an average of more than $760 a month for using his personal car over the last nine years.Starting in 2011, Mr. Heastie also had the use of SUVs paid for by the Bronx Democratic Party, Mr. Benedetto said.Mr. Heastie regularly took the first of those SUVs, a used Chevrolet Traverse the party bought for him, to St. Ann’s Auto Repairs, where repairs totaled $6,000 over two years. Mr. Benedetto said that in August 2013, the party leased a new Jeep for Mr. Heastie, at a cost of $330 a month.Mr. Whyland, Mr. Heastie’s spokesman, said the speaker had owned three personal cars over the last decade, typically two at once. He declined to identify the cars or provide odometer readings for them. He said the state mileage reimbursements covered only trips to and from Albany, and that the repairs billed to the campaign were related to official or political travel elsewhere. He said the Board of Elections had told Mr. Heastie that campaign expenditures for vehicle repairs were within the board’s guidelines.“The speaker follows the law,” Mr. Whyland wrote.James Spencer, the owner of St. Ann’s Auto Repairs, said in an interview that Mr. Heastie had driven BMWs for more than a decade. He said Mr. Heastie’s “workers” began to bring other cars to the garage several years ago. Mr. Spencer could not recall why Mr. Heastie’s BMW needed such frequent work, or the total costs involved.“Once the paper goes to my accountant, I don’t keep it,” he said.The Moreland Commission cited the issue of officials’ billing both the state and their campaigns for vehicle expenses as worrisome. And the Nassau County district attorney’s office recently said it was examining the mileage records of all state lawmakers in its jurisdiction after NBC 4 New York reported that State Senator Carl L. Marcellino had billed both the state and his campaign for vehicle expenses. Mr. Marcellino, a Republican, denied wrongdoing.“The mileage system is porous and is prone to abuse,” Madeline Singas, acting district attorney for Nassau County, said.The Moreland Commission was also harshly critical of lawmakers’ spending campaign money on what appeared to be personal expenses and said that state laws limiting this kind of spending should be tightened. The Board of Elections has historically given candidates great leeway as far as what it considers an appropriate expense.Mr. Heastie and Mr. Cuomo negotiated changes to state ethics laws this year, including adding new descriptions of the type of spending banned as personal. But they were criticized by watchdog groups and others for not going far enough, allowing candidates, for example, to charge their campaigns for clothes worn while campaigning or performing their official duties.“So pretty much anything that you wear, just make sure you’re wearing it on a day you are campaigning or going to work,” Lawrence Norden, deputy director of the Democracy Program at the Brennan Center for Justice, said.Money for GirlfriendsThere are numerous examples of Mr. Heastie’s spending campaign money in ways that appear more closely tied to his personal interests than to running for office.Twice, for example, he has used campaign funds to pay his girlfriends.In September 2002, with Mr. Heastie unopposed in the primary, his campaign paid Charsleissa King, who was his girlfriend and living with him at the time, $550 for the “design of campaign literature.” But records show the campaign did not spend any money on the printing of literature the rest of that year.Asked about the payment, Mr. Whyland said the piece that Ms. King designed turned out to be unnecessary because the primary opponent Mr. Heastie expected to face was knocked off the ballot.In 2011, Mr. Heastie’s campaign paid Alvita Robertson, an aspiring model known as Lan with whom he has a daughter, $2,500 to design a campaign website. The New York Post reported this year that Ms. Robertson had used some of the money to hire a professional web designer and had kept the rest. Mr. Whyland said Ms. Robertson owns a company specializing in web design and was “more than qualified” to do the work.Each fall for the last three years, Mr. Heastie’s campaign has paid his alma mater, Stony Brook University on Long Island, for what filings describe as “tickets for football game,” “donation for tickets” or simply “event.” The payments — from $50 to $300 — were made the week of the university’s annual homecoming game.Mr. Whyland said the university had invited Mr. Heastie to the game each year “in his official capacity as a member of the Assembly to view the game with the president of the university and other dignitaries and elected officials.”Party for Guaranteed Victory Over the years, the Heastie campaign has also paid for frequent “meetings” or “staff events” at Manhattan nightclubs miles from his northeast Bronx district.Mr. Whyland said that all of the spending was related to political work, though he declined to cite a purpose or guest list for any specific events.“The campaign committee has hosted numerous events over the years to thank volunteers, supporters and staff, and for things like a team-building event,” he said.In May 2010, Mr. Heastie’s campaign paid the $150 bill for a “meeting” at the Village Underground, a music and comedy venue in Greenwich Village.It also paid $1,700 for three “staff events” at a location identified in disclosure reports as H&Y Duet (misspelled twice as “Duvet”) on 48th Street in Manhattan. The reference is to Karaoke Duet 48, a karaoke bar where private rooms can be rented for $8 per person, per hour.While the three karaoke events came in years when Mr. Heastie had no election, two fell close to his birthday, Sept. 25: One was on Sept. 26, 2009, for which the campaign paid $978; another was on Sept. 30, 2011, for which the campaign paid $350.In 2004, Mr. Heastie ran for re-election unopposed in the Democratic primary and the general election. But even with a victory guaranteed, his campaign covered the cost of what a filing described as a “victory celebration.”The event was held that November at Cherry Lounge, at the time a fashionable nightclub in Harlem co-owned by the rap producer Timbaland whose opening two months earlier had been attended by Bruce Willis and Sean Combs.Mr. Heastie’s campaign paid $700 for the celebration. On three other occasions over the next few months, the campaign paid $80 to $216 for “food” at Cherry Lounge. An archived copy of the club’s website does not mention food but says the doors opened at 11 p.m. Cherry Lounge went out of business a little more than a year after it opened.In 2006, Mr. Heastie was again unopposed in the primary, virtually assuring his re-election. Nonetheless, campaign finance filings suggest he was busy around Manhattan.On Sept. 24, 2006, the day before Mr. Heastie’s 39th birthday, his campaign paid $270 “for food” at Happy Valley, a nightclub on East 27th Street. During the club’s effervescent two years in business, its kitchen facilities were equipped only to warm food brought in by caterers for private parties, Joe Vicari, an owner of the club, said.A reviewer for The Times wrote of Happy Valley that “the mood felt debauched and illicit in just the right ways.” Behind the bar was a huge mannequin of a woman’s crotch with legs splayed toward the ceiling. Scantily clad dancers gyrated in a neon cage above the dance floor. Shirtless men in tight gym shorts and tube socks bused tables. Waitresses wore leopard-print jumpsuits.“We had quite the mix of people,” Mr. Vicari said.