FRONT PAGEBecause of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about a restaurant in New Jersey that is letting diners decide what to pay for their meals referred incorrectly at one point to a professor of marketing at the University of Minnesota who writes about the psychology of money. The professor, Kathleen D. Vohs, is a woman.NATIONALAn article on Tuesday about residents’ responses to an earthquake in the San Francisco area on Monday misidentified the city in which the television station KTVU is located. It is in Oakland, not in San Francisco.BUSINESS DAYAn article on Monday about new research showing that blacks and Hispanics with college degrees suffer disproportionately more in economic downturns than white and Asian college graduates gave an outdated position for Prof. William A. Darity Jr. at Duke University, who commented on the findings. He is with the Samuel DuBois Cook Center on Social Equity — not with the Consortium on Social Equity, which no longer exists.•An article on Tuesday about the choice of Robert Steven Kaplan, a former Goldman Sachs executive, as president of the Dallas Federal Reserve Bank misstated, in some copies, the name of a public interest group whose director, Ady Barkan, was critical of the Fed’s selection process. It is the Center for Popular Democracy, not the Center for Public Democracy.SPORTSAn article in some editions on Saturday about the Mets’ 3-2 loss to the Pittsburgh Pirates misstated, in some copies, the type of hit Juan Lagares had for the Mets in the bottom of 10th inning. It was a double, not a triple.THE ARTSBecause of an editing error, a report in the “Arts, Briefly” column on Tuesday about Broadway box-office grosses last week misstated the amounts taken in by “Hamilton” and “Penn & Teller on Broadway.” “Hamilton” grossed $1,459,314, not $1,555,706. That is the amount taken in by “Penn & Teller on Broadway,” not $1,153,386. The report also referred incorrectly to “An American in Paris.” It is a new musical, not a revival.•A theater review on Tuesday about “Head Over Heels,” at the Allen Elizabethan Theater in Ashland, Ore., misstated the choreographer’s surname. As a listing of credits correctly noted, she is Sonya Tayeh, not Tateh.WEEKENDAn  article  on Friday about a new SeaGlass carousel in Lower Manhattan misidentified the part of the Battery where the carousel is located. It is in the Battery Woodland, not the Battery Bosque. The article also referred incorrectly to Piet Oudolf. He is the horticultural master planner and designer of gardens at the Battery, not the landscape architect. (The Starr Whitehouse firm is the landscape architect.)The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed tonytnews@nytimes.comor left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed toletters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor atpublic@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.