CHICAGO —  The Wisconsin Supreme Court on Thursday ordered an end to an investigation into whether Gov. Scott Walker’s recall campaign in 2012 illegally coordinated with conservative groups, removing a potentially thorny issue from his budding run for the Republican presidential nomination.In a divided ruling from the highly polarized court, a majority of Wisconsin justices found that the state’s campaign finance law included language that was unconstitutionally vague and broad, a finding that could be seen as loosening fund-raising and spending regulations on so-called issue advocacy involving all political groups in the state.The ruling, complicated by three related lawsuits, numerous separate legal issues and multiple written opinions from the justices, concluded that a largely secret investigation into outside groups and Mr. Walker’s successful effort to survive a recall in 2012 could not continue “because the special prosecutor’s legal theory is unsupported in either reason or law.”“Consequently, the investigation is closed,” the ruling said.Stalled by previous court decisions for more than a year, the investigation looked at whether Mr. Walker’s advisers directed interactions with at least a dozen outside conservative groups, including the Wisconsin Club for Growth, Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce, and Citizens for a Strong America, and whether that violated state law on disclosure rules and donation limits for political purposes.Lawyers for some of the groups said no laws had been violated, in part, because the outside groups never explicitly told people who they should vote for in the 2012 recall.The case had clouded Mr. Walker’s political aspirations, though a special prosecutor had said the governor was not a target of the investigation, and no charges came out of it. Mr. Walker praised the justices’ finding on Thursday.“We’re pleased,” Mr. Walker said during a campaign stop in Amherst, N.H. “As folks in Wisconsin will tell you, I’ve gone through these battles so many times I don’t get too up or too down. I’m pretty even-keeled in all this. So we’re pleased. It’s just one more thing that allows us to take a step going forward.”But critics of the ruling said it was worrisome because it appeared to open the door for unregulated coordination between political campaigns and outside groups — so long as the groups stuck to advocating particular issues and did not explicitly call on people to vote for a particular candidate.“The decision is a field day for corruption, and an early Christmas present for the C.E.O.s, multimillionaires and billionaires, who already exercise such an undue influence over our elections,” said Matt Rothschild, the executive director of the Wisconsin Democracy Campaign, which tracks money in state political races.The majority’s ruling found that a reference to “political purposes” in the state campaign finance law was too broad unless applied only to advocacy for a particular candidate. That conclusion, the ruling said, essentially invalidates prosecutors’ theory of the case. “It is utterly clear that the special prosecutor has employed theories of law that do not exist in order to investigate citizens who were wholly innocent of any wrongdoing,” the ruling said.In a dissenting opinion over the campaign finance element of the case, the court’s longtime chief justice, Shirley S. Abrahamson, considered part of the court’s liberal bloc, issued a stinging critique. “Lest the length, convoluted analysis and overblown rhetoric of the majority opinion obscure its effect, let me state clearly: The majority opinion adopts an unprecedented and faulty interpretation of Wisconsin’s campaign finance law and of the First Amendment.”The climate on the court has become increasingly polarized and antagonistic as the split between the larger conservative bloc and its liberal one has been seen to widen. In April, Justice Abrahamson filed a federal lawsuit after voters approved a Republican-led constitutional amendment changing the way the chief justice is picked — in essence, assuring that a member of the conservative bloc, Patience Roggensack, would be chosen to replace her.Legal experts said the special prosecutor in the recall case, Francis D. Schmitz, could appeal Thursday’s decision to the United States Supreme Court on several grounds, including a question over whether some of the judges should have recused themselves. Mr. Schmitz did not respond to an email on Thursday.Court documents show that Mr. Schmitz had asked at least one justice to step aside from the case because of potential conflicts; legal experts say they suspect that the court’s four conservatives were asked to step aside because some of the conservative groups that were under investigation spent money that critics say was aimed at supporting the justices’ elections in previous years.All four conservative justices refused to step aside and concurred with the majority finding, which was written by Justice Michael Gablemen. One liberal justice recused herself because of unrelated ties to the case, while two others, including Justice Abrahamson, dissented with portions of the majority ruling.Nothing about this case has been common: The justices took the unusual step of hearing no live arguments, instead requesting only written briefs from both sides because of the complicated secrecy rules. Documents have been released publicly only after tense, time-consuming debate over how much to reveal and what portions to redact. All along, the inquiry has been murky, largely because the law that governs such investigations — known in Wisconsin as John Doe investigations — includes strict secrecy guidelines often barring those involved from speaking publicly about them.John Chisholm, the Milwaukee County district attorney and a Democrat, began the investigation and was later joined by other county prosecutors from both parties. Ultimately, Mr. Schmitz, who has described himself as a Republican, was appointed to oversee the case.In some documents, prosecutors put forth a theory that Mr. Walker’s campaign advisers had helped direct political spending by outside groups as part of a “criminal scheme,” and suggested that Mr. Walker himself was closely involved in arranging contributions from wealthy donors to the outside groups. Such requests, the prosecutors indicated, encouraged donors to help him with limitless, anonymous donations that got around state contribution and disclosure rules.The investigation was blocked after a series of lower court decisions.More than a year ago, a state court judge, Gregory A. Peterson, quashed subpoenas in the case, saying he had found no probable cause of campaign finance violations. Similarly, a federal judge, Rudolph T. Randa, issued an injunction to stop the inquiry. But in September, a panel from the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit rejected the injunction, said the matter belonged in state court and left the decision to the Wisconsin Supreme Court.