How about this concept for a new movie: A highly ambitious young man kills his father. Then he marries his mother. They have several children together. He becomes a powerful figure. Eventually, though, he is horrified by all he has done, the anguish so deep that he gouges out his eyes. His wife/mother hangs herself. Nor do their children escape unscathed. One daughter in particular is an emotional wreck.Do you think any major film company would fight for this project, given a story that many people might disdain as no better than slasher porn?Now, what if we said the writer of this plotline was a writer named Sophocles, and his ill-fated protagonist was a king called Oedipus? Has the story morphed from exploitative schlock into high art? Many would say yes. Still, its lurid content can be deeply upsetting. In that case, should it carry the most strongly worded label possible to alert the unwary? If so, how much of a distinction is there between a warning and censorship?In one form or another, this question is one that Americans have wrestled with for decades, and it shapes the latest offering from Retro Report, a series of documentary videos that examine major news events of the past and their repercussions. Leaving Oedipus out of the discussion, the video focuses on two major battles: one over gory comic books in the 1950s, the other over sex- and violence-laden rock songs in the 1980s. Both led to Senate hearings. Both also led to significant changes in how artists’ works were brought to market.In the 1950s, the country was in the grip of what cultural critics later described as a “moral panic” over comic books, notably those that dealt in horror and crime. A leading figure in this matter was a German-born American psychiatrist, Dr. Fredric Wertham, who emphatically warned that comics put children on the road to delinquency, addiction and lifelong ruin. Two years ago, a University of Illinois professor, Carol Tilley, concluded in a research paper that Wertham had “manipulated, overstated, compromised and fabricated evidence.” But back in the ’50s, he held sway, with consequences felt for decades. Comic magazines were driven out of business by the dozens, and a Comics Code Authority was created to enforce stern new industry standards of decency and morality. The code was revised — usually softened — from time to time over the years, until it finally faded away in 2011.On the issue of music dripping with frank sex and brutishness, tensions reached a boil at a Senate hearing in September 1985. Earlier that year, a band of politically connected women had created the Parents Music Resource Center, spawned by their outrage over certain pop offerings, like songs that exalted masturbation and album covers that showed buzz saws slicing through codpieces. A leader of this group was Susan Baker, the wife of James A. Baker III, a pillar of the Republican establishment. But probably no one represented the movement more prominently than a Democrat, Tipper Gore, married at the time to Senator Al Gore, the future vice president. Ms. Gore, appalled by the explicit music that her daughter had purchased and brought home, became the public face of the campaign, sounding alarms about what she viewed as the cynical exploitation of young people by the recording industry.Her group sought, among other things, to require stringent warning labels. Not surprisingly, the music industry pushed back, with some well-known performers in the forefront. Few pushed harder than Frank Zappa, the former leader of the rock group the Mothers of Invention. Mr. Zappa, who died in 1993, sneered at these mothers of intervention, dismissing them as “the wives of Big Brother.” Along with others who testified at the hearings, he denounced any labeling system as a slide down the slippery slope of censorship — equivalent, he said, to “treating dandruff by decapitation.”Nonetheless, warnings on music albums and tracks came to pass, not unlike those that already existed for movies. Over the years, the cautionary notices were altered; typically, they now say “Parental Advisory: Explicit Content.” They endure even as the music industry has gone through seismic change, shifting from tapes and CDs to online streaming.Fretting about pop culture as a corrupting force has been part of human nature since at least the ancient Greeks. Plato had little use for dramatists like Sophocles or those plays based on the complex Oedipus. Jeremiads on how society was hurtling headlong on the road to perdition accompanied just about every new development, from radio to television, from jazz to rap, from Elvis’s swiveling pelvis to Miley Cyrus’s twerking.As for violence, where would art and literature be without it? The Book of Genesis could not go more than three chapters without its first murder. Bodies litter the stage in Shakespeare’s tragedies. Grimm fairy tales are grim indeed. In the American Film Institute’s lineup of the 100 greatest American movies of all time, at least 60 contain one form of brutality or another, much of it exceedingly bloody.One film classic from 1949, which did not make the institute’s list, offers the proposition that violence and cultural achievement often go hand in hand. “You know what the fellow said,” a character in “The Third Man” says. “In Italy for 30 years under the Borgias, they had warfare, terror, murder and bloodshed, but they produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci and the Renaissance. In Switzerland, they had brotherly love. They had 500 years of democracy and peace. And what did that produce? The cuckoo clock.”The advent of warning labels has hardly ended the artistic exploration of sex and violence. Notwithstanding Mr. Zappa’s dire forecasts, government repression does not reign. The last time anyone looked, songs were still being recorded and teenagers were still listening. An argument could even be made that these labels sometimes have an effect other than the intended one, by pointing teenagers, who practically live to upset their elders, in the direction of the forbidden fruit.And the labels keep coming. The latest, as Retro Report notes, are “trigger warnings” that have been proposed on some college campuses, to alert students to curriculum material that may upset them or possibly cause post-traumatic reactions in, say, rape victims or combat veterans. Works suggested for such advisories have included “The Great Gatsby” (misogyny), “The Merchant of Venice” (anti-Semitism) and “Mrs. Dalloway” (suicide). Are these alerts a reasonable way to shield the more vulnerable from harm, as proponents assert? Or are they, as critics fire back, a misguided notion that infantilizes students who would be better served by dealing directly with life’s harsher realities?When it comes to warnings, consistency is not always a helpmate. Susan Baker, for instance, told Retro Report that she still believes in the importance of labels for explicit music, but that she was skeptical about classroom trigger warnings. Whether one is right or left politically, much seems to depend on the target — on, if you will, whose ox is Gored.