This article was initially published as a letter to subscribers of The Upshot’s weekly newsletter. You can sign up for the email here to get this and all of the best of The Upshot.Dear Upshot readers,We in the news media are in the midst of a self-hating binge of Donald Trump coverage. “Stop Covering Donald Trump,” proclaimed a paradoxical recent headline in Mother Jones. A Washington Post headline argued, “Why Is Trump Surging? Blame the Media.” The Christian Science Monitor simply asked, “Has Media Lost Its Collective Mind?”The Huffington Post has moved coverage of the campaign to its entertainment section, from its politics sections. Rupert Murdoch has urged his deputies at Fox News to pay less attention to the Trump campaign — apparently without success, according to Gabe Sherman of New York Magazine.It’s certainly true that the Trump campaign resembles a circus. I grew up in New York in the 1980s, so it’s a circus I’ve been watching for three decades now — the bombast, the insults, the marriages, the business successes and the business failures. Yes, his presidential campaign is an attention-grabbing lark that has little connection to the country’s most serious issues and that is doomed to join the list of Trump failures. And yet I think the political media is unnecessarily tortured about its role in the Trump show. Ultimately, the media is likely to play a valuable role.Let’s start by acknowledging that political reporters didn’t create Donald Trump. He was a celebrity long before he announced his presidential campaign — a bigger celebrity than any other Republican candidate. He starred in his own television show for more than a decade, has his name on buildings and has been appearing on the cover of People magazine since at least 1990. It wasn’t within the power of the political media simply to get together and devise a conspiracy to ignore him. It probably wouldn’t have been appropriate, anyway.For better or worse, many Americans are fascinated by him. Google searches on his name have not simply spiked in the aftermath of media coverage of the Trump campaign, as both John Dickerson of CBS News and Nate Silver of FiveThirtyEight have noted. Sometimes, the public’s interest has preceded the media’s interest. Mr. Trump’s position atop the polls is causing the media coverage more than the reverse.Obviously, some of the coverage of the Trump campaign — including much of the cable television coverage — is frivolous, and this attention is most likely inflating his poll numbers. But media coverage doesn’t have the potential only to help candidates. It can also hurt them. The long history of presidential campaigns by candidates like Mr. Trump — those who have never before held elective office and who, on paper, are not qualified for the presidency — suggests that media coverage will ultimately damage him.If you haven’t yet read my colleague Nate Cohn’s piece on this subject, I encourage you to do so. Nate retells the story of the 2012 campaign of Herman Cain, another bombastic businessman who surged to the top of the Republican polls. Then came the media scrutiny of Mr. Cain’s checkered past — and Republican voters soon decided that they didn’t want him to be their nominee, after all. Candidates like Mr. Cain and Mr. Trump, “without a stronger foundation for their support in the polls,” Nate wrote, “can succumb to the most basic tests that serious candidates face routinely and usually endure.”American democracy is hardly perfect, nor is media coverage. But the news media does play a valuable democratic role in vetting presidential candidates over the long campaign, and the Trump story will almost certainly become part of that history. It’s happening already.Just a few days after Nate wrote his piece, The Daily Beast uncovered a deposition in which Ivana Trump, the candidate’s ex-wife, said he had violently assaulted her. In response to questions about the incident, a lawyer for Mr. Trump threatened a Daily Beast reporter, saying he would ruin the reporter’s life. “You put Mr. Trump’s name there onto it, rest assured, you will suffer the consequences,” the lawyer, Michael Cohen, said. The vetting is underway.