Now that Sepp Blatter has resigned, widespread international glee is tempered by a daunting question for FIFA: What next?An organization that seemed incapable of meaningful reform must now make quick, profound changes in transparency and accountability if it is to regain credibility in the wake of revelations of widespread corruption.It seems clear that FIFA not only has to change its president after Mr. Blatter’s resignation but also its entire culture, a foul ethos of secrecy, corruption and self-enrichment.“World football has a culture problem,” said David Larkin, a lawyer based in Washington who specializes in international sports and is a director of the organization ChangeFIFA. “The pollution of the culture. If you don’t get rid of it, it will keep happening over and over again.”An intriguing idea was proposed last summer by Chris Eaton, an anticorruption expert and a former head of security at FIFA. The idea was to form a “Football Truth Commission,” using a process similar to the one South Africa set up in coming to terms with apartheid.Public hearings could be held before lawyers, judges and investigators. Soccer officials could confess what they did, knew or suspected about corruption, bribery or match-fixing. FIFA’s books could be opened. The guilty could ask for leniency or amnesty.“Consequences of discovery” of wrongdoing after the conclusion of the commission’s work “would be severe, encouraging all to come forward,” Mr. Eaton told the British newspaper The Daily Telegraph a year ago.When FIFA begins to put in place overhauls, it should do what the Olympics did with drug testing — turn it over to independent investigators. Transparency International, a global anticorruption organization, is right in saying that an overhaul committee should be made up of people who are not appointed or paid by FIFA, and not confined by politics in their investigations or when editing their reports.“Reform cannot come from within FIFA, nor from those who are no longer credible,” Transparency International said in a statement on Tuesday.There is potential reward and risk in including Mr. Blatter in any attempts at change, said Dick Pound, a member of the International Olympic Committee from Montreal who led the investigation of a bribery scandal in Salt Lake City ahead of the 2002 Winter Games there.“The good side is, he’s got no more skin in the game, so he can help clean it up,” Mr. Pound said of Mr. Blatter. “The bad side is, the delegates might say, ‘You’re out of here, so we don’t have to worry about you.’ ”Mr. Pound added, “You can see the possibility of a meeting with some of the delegates saying, ‘I’ve got 55 votes in my pocket here, which will come your way if you don’t look under too many stones.’ ”A torrent of proposals for overhauls have poured forward in recent years: term limits for FIFA’s president and executive committee; independent members serving on the executive committee for oversight; independent vetting of all senior FIFA officials; mandatory competitive bidding on contracts; no cash transactions; more women in decision-making positions; and public accounting of the salaries and bonuses paid to top officials.Markus Kattner, FIFA’s head of finance and administration, told Bloomberg News recently, and arrogantly, about Mr. Blatter’s undisclosed salary: “We have hidden it so you cannot find it. We’re not publishing it, first of all, because we don’t have to.”There should be a re-examination of the bid process that awarded the 2018 World Cup to Russia and the 2022 World Cup to Qatar. And officials should reconsider the one-country, one-vote system in FIFA elections to determine whether it promotes democracy or patronage.Grant Wahl, a senior writer with Sports Illustrated who tried to run against Mr. Blatter in the 2011 FIFA presidential election, suggests that an outsider be named to run international soccer. He nominates Kofi Annan, the former secretary general of the United Nations, who would signal that “there’s a new sheriff in charge.”Short of that, the favorite to replace Mr. Blatter might be Prince Ali bin al-Hussein of Jordan, who opposed him in last week’s election. Michel Platini, who heads the European soccer confederation, is considered another favorite.Some have mentioned Sunil Gulati, president of the United States Soccer Federation and a member of FIFA’s executive committee. But Mr. Blatter fanned anti-American resentment after last week’s indictments of 14 soccer and marketing officials by the United States authorities.Mr. Gulati has also faced scrutiny for his association in Concacaf, the soccer federation of North America, Central America and the Caribbean, with several of the indicted officials: Chuck Blazer, Jack Warner and Jeffrey Webb.Mr. Gulati has not been accused of any wrongdoing. And he sought change by supporting Prince Ali over Mr. Blatter. Still, Mr. Larkin of ChangeFIFA said, “How can contemporaries of Mr. Blazer and Mr. Warner still in Concacaf not have had a reasonable suspicion that something was wrong?”Mr. Gulati declined to comment on Tuesday. His supporters point out that the accused are said to have concocted elaborate schemes to conceal their actions.“I consider him someone who I can say, without a doubt, is always committed to doing the right thing,” Don Garber, the commissioner of Major League Soccer, said of Mr. Gulati.Mr. Garber added: “I can say without any hesitation that if he had even an inkling that any of this was going on, he would have stepped up. And he would have not only said something, he would have done everything he could to do something about it.”Speaking in general terms, Mr. Garber said that with Mr. Blatter’s resignation, “You almost feel like a dark cloud was lifted off this sport.”An opportunity now exists for real structural change, Mr. Garber said. “It would be a shame if we missed this opportunity,” he said.