On the day after Labor Day, as so many people uploaded moody pictures of empty meadows and forlorn marine birds, indulging the ritual mourning of summer’s end that social media has amplified, the temperature in Central Park reached 97 degrees. This surpassed a record for the day (set in 1919 when it was 4 degrees cooler), making Sept. 8, 2015, the hottest September day in New York City in 32 years. Among the masses already returned from Nantucket or Vermont or Beach 108th Street, complaint and distress proceeded accordingly.The weather seemed to bear out, perhaps prematurely, the predictions of a report issued this year by the New York City Panel on Climate Change forecasting rising sea levels and temperatures and a near doubling of the frequency of heat waves in the city by 2050. In an effort to preclude some of the consequences of global warming, the de Blasio administration has set the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions in municipal buildings by 35 percent over the next decade.A new audit by the city comptroller’s office, though, indicates that at the current rate, buildings will not be able to meet the target, which has already been modified from a goal set during the Bloomberg years of cutting emissions by 30 percent by 2017. Using data from the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, auditors found that city buildings were reducing greenhouse gas emissions at an average annual rate of only 2.3 percent. The report cited bureaucratic failures in monitoring progress and incomplete plans for retrofitting city buildings.Envisioning a scenario of increasingly hot Septembers, Mark Levine, chairman of the City Council’s Committee on Parks and Recreation, introduced a bill this spring to extend the city’s beach and pool season, which usually ends on Labor Day, on weekdays until the start of school and on weekends through the end of September. Nearly 1.5 million people a year visit city pools; in 2014, 18 million people went to city beaches, a 22 percent increase over the 2013 figure. The academic calendar left school starting later than is typical, not until Sept. 9. Last year, Mr. Levine pointed out, school hadn’t begun until three days after Labor Day, on the fourth, and early September brought scorching weather.To him and others, the extension was an imperative of democracy, given how few children are a part of families with weekend houses and country-club memberships. Because of the high costs of maintaining and staffing public spaces, a compromise was reached, keeping the city’s beaches, but not pools, open an additional week. But it is pools that draw more thoroughly from an underserved population. Pools are in neighborhoods; beaches are harder to get to.On Tuesday, I visited Orchard Beach in the Bronx, where the heat made it feel vaguely like Nevada in July. The beach was fairly crowded for a weekday, I was told. Nearly everyone I spoke to, those who came with children and those who came without, had arrived by car — from the Pelham Bay section of the Bronx, downtown Manhattan, Brooklyn and Westchester County. Three women sitting near the shoreline — Lucy Castignoli, Gloria Oppizzi and Anna D’Errico — who all at one time or another lived in East Harlem, when the neighborhood was predominantly Italian, had been coming to Orchard Beach together and separately for decades. While they were pleased that the beach was now officially open after Labor Day, it didn’t matter all that much, they confessed, because you could always cheat and come anyway. Pools are drained; naturally occurring bodies of water are not.Among those who would like to see pools stay open are leaders of the lifeguards’ union, who argue that although many members are college students who go back to school at the end of August, there are plenty of pool lifeguards attending college in the city who could use the extra income. Henry Garrido, the executive director of District Council 37, which includes the lifeguards’ union, would like to persuade skeptics that keeping pools open longer is a preventive against misbehavior. “What happens to the kids?” he said. “They open fire hydrants to cool off and they do something inappropriate like join a gang.”Heat has long been a point of class division in New York — as it is now, globally, with studies showing that climate change will more drastically affect poorer countries than wealthier ones. In the 19th century, drownings were a common occurrence in the East River as immigrants in tenement neighborhoods descended into the water to bathe and find relief. The extra week that beaches have been kept open will ultimately cost the city in excess of $680,000. Keeping pools open longer would cost even more, and there are always reasons not to spend money.A lengthier swimming season — pools don’t get going until the end of June — could presumably become a worthy cause for minor league philanthropy. Imagine if every time someone boarded the Hampton Jitney, or a helicopter to the beach, $1 (or $20) went into a pot — battling inequality one breast stroke at a time.