The challenger, a former state legislator threatening the party favorite, was kicked off the primary ballot in a district attorney race in Queens after a judge ruled that the signatures he had gathered were not valid. The man, seeking to beat Richard A. Brown, lost an appeal, paving the way for Mr. Brown to easily defeat a Republican in the heavily Democratic borough.That was in 1991, and it was the last time Mr. Brown faced an opponent for the office.Now 83, Mr. Brown has been re-elected six times, most recently in November, a victory so routine there was no public celebration. Concerns about his health — Mr. Brown has been open about his struggles with Parkinson’s disease — and rumors that his office is increasingly managed by his top associates have done little to churn up opposition.However, in an era when criminal justice reform is an increasing part of the conversation in New York City, and district attorney seats in Brooklyn and Manhattan have turned over in recent years — or, in the case of Staten Island and the Bronx, will on Jan. 1 — some people have begun asking where Mr. Brown’s challengers are.Already the longest-serving district attorney in Queens, Mr. Brown will become the city’s longest-serving top county prosecutor when his new term begins in January. To his supporters, the string of uncontested elections indicates the respect Mr. Brown — known as the Judge for his time on the bench — has earned.“He’s run a good office,” said Arnold N. Kriss, a defense lawyer and political adviser to Mr. Brown. “It’s very hard to be a candidate against a sitting district attorney when there’s nothing to run against.”Others said his long tenure was a reminder that the city’s antiquated political machines were still a force in Queens.“It undermines democracy when there is no real challenger to step up to run against incumbents,” said Dick Dadey, the executive director of Citizens Union, a government watchdog.Some legal professionals and government watchdogs compared Mr. Brown’s absence of challengers in Queens with the situation in the Bronx, where Robert T. Johnson, the district attorney since 1989, announced, after winning an uncontested primary in September, that he would seek a judgeship. The move allowed Democratic leaders to select a replacement candidate, and, by default, the next top prosecutor.“District attorneys in New York are virtually like Supreme Court justices: They’re there forever,” Doug Muzzio, a professor of public affairs at Baruch College, said. “The judiciary is one of the last bastions of machine control.”Around the courthouse complex in Kew Gardens, Queens, Gregory L. Lasak and Kenneth C. Holder, both state judges and former prosecutors in Mr. Brown’s office, are frequently mentioned as potential candidates for his job.Peter F. Vallone Jr., a former city councilman from a well-connected political family in Queens, had been vocal about his interest. But Mr. Valone was elected to a Civil Court judge post instead, having been nominated by the Queens Democratic Party. He ran unopposed.“There’s a guy who’s going to run,” Professor Muzzio said of Mr. Vallone. “Make him a civil judge and get him out of the way.”Mr. Vallone said he had never considered running against Mr. Brown. “I’m not blind to the politics involved in any judgeship,” he said. “But I’m extremely qualified for the position and I’ve earned it.”Before being elected to his first term, Mr. Brown was appointed by Gov. Mario M. Cuomo after the previous district attorney, John J. Santucci, stepped down, and there were whispers around the courthouse that Mr. Brown might do the same: retire and let the Democratic Party choose his successor.“The Judge has every intention of serving as district attorney for the full four-year term,” Kevin Ryan, a spokesman, said.But unlike Mr. Johnson in the Bronx, who presided in a courthouse with extensive delays and was criticized for a seeming reluctance to aggressively pursue corruption cases, Mr. Brown has a solid reputation.Statistics highlight his office’s successes. In 2014, Mr. Brown’s staff had the highest percentage of convictions in the five boroughs after arrests for violent felonies and domestic violence, a point of pride for the office. The borough’s average arrest-to-arraignment time that year — just over 18 hours — was the lowest in the city.Even Mr. Brown’s critics have pointed to reforms that have flourished under his leadership. People with mental illnesses or drug addictions who commit low-level crimes, for example, can avoid jail time by enrolling in treatment programs. And Mr. Brown has earned points recently, supporters said, for creating a department to help immigrants who have experienced crimes. Similar programs exist in Brooklyn and Manhattan.Many of Mr. Brown’s detractors focus on practices unique to Queens. Some lawyers said the office’s pretrial plea policy — where people charged with felonies are encouraged to waive their rights to speedy trials or risk not being offered plea deals later — was coercive and manipulative. They said that the script used to interrogate suspects before their arraignments, wording that was declared unconstitutional in 2014, was still troublesome despite revisions. And some said the office’s zealousness in prosecuting people who miss court dates on bail-jumping charges added to the legal burden of people charged with minor crimes.“How many people have missed a doctor’s appointment?” said one defense lawyer who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he works with the district attorney’s office. “It kind of has a disparate impact on the poor people who’ve had difficult lives.”And there have been missteps, such as the incarceration of two men for six years each before their murder cases were resolved this year. Terrel Banks went through three mistrials before the charges were dropped and he was released in March. Himen Ross was acquitted in May.Even those who support Mr. Brown said the absence of choices in the voting booth had consequences.“We’re like stuck in time here; Queens hasn’t changed,” said Sally Butler, a defense lawyer who represented Mr. Ross and worked in Mr. Brown’s office in the 1990s. “I have not thought that there will ever be a real election. Both parties running a candidate? Never. I don’t even think of it.”But change did happen in Brooklyn after the longtime incumbent, Charles J. Hynes, a Democrat, was ousted by voters in 2013. He had been in office since 1990. His successor, Ken Thompson, a fellow Democrat, announced in 2014 that the office would stop prosecuting most low-level marijuana cases. Mr. Thompson also set up a Conviction Review Unit, and 17 convictions have so far been overturned.“I think there’s probably more of a reluctance in overturning something when you’ve been anointed to a position rather than when there’s a free election,” said Abe George, a former prosecutor in Brooklyn and Manhattan, who challenged Mr. Hynes in 2013. “Brooklyn speaks to how important it is to have the district attorney’s position be unfettered from politics.”The voters in Manhattan and on Staten Island have had more choices in recent elections. Cyrus R. Vance Jr., a Democrat, was elected district attorney in Manhattan in 2009 after defeating two others in the primary. He succeeded Robert M. Morgenthau, who served for 35 years before retiring at 90. On Staten Island, Michael E. McMahon, a Democrat, defeated a Republican for the post last month.In Queens, Mr. Brown credits the work of his office with his opponent-free races. “I like to think that the reason is the fact that we’re doing a good job and we’re doing it to the satisfaction of the people” of Queens, he said during a recent interview, adding, “We took over an office that was very much in the dark ages, and we have an office today that I think is as fine an office as you’re going to find anyplace.”The district attorney said he was looking forward to his next term, when he planned to create an animal rights unit. He said he had never considered retiring.“My health obviously is a little troublesome, but it’s stabilized itself,” he said. “It certainly has not affected my thought process or my ability to think issues through, and that is certainly something I’m very, very careful about.”As voters filed out of the polls on Election Day last month with little in the way of attention-grabbing races, a few had noticed that Mr. Brown was the lone candidate.“How can that be good democracy when there’s only one candidate?” said Glen Covington, 51, a law enforcement officer who had just cast his ballot in Ridgewood. “You have no choices,” Mr. Covington added. “It really says the system is broken.”