Looking for gift books? Need to cover an empty coffee table? Or to construct one? Here are some hefty holiday offerings, all about New York.The city’s 50-year-old buildings preservation law has inspired “Interior Landmarks: Treasures of New York” (The New York School of Interior Design, the Monacelli Press; $60), by Judith Gura and Kate Wood, a spectacular celebration of protected spaces, public and private.What makes this book so visually inviting is its access to 47 official landmarks that are architectural gems often overlooked or inaccessible, like the Woolworth Building and the Seventh Regiment Armory.The enactment of the law in 1965 meant the difference between demolition and salvation. Or, as the authors put it, compare the fates of the old Metropolitan Opera House and Radio City Music Hall; if the opera house was the Pennsylvania Station of interiors, Radio City was fortunate to be the Grand Central Terminal.Jeremy Black, a history professor at the University of Exeter, generously fulfills any urbanologist’s fantasy in “Metropolis: Mapping the City” (Bloomsbury Publishing; $50). New York is represented by schematics of Manhattan’s early-20th-century density and ethnic composition as well as a 1960s-era subway map.Jacob Riis’s late-19th-century admonition that the battle against the slum began only when conscience joined forces with fear and self-interest still resonates with modern readers in a gripping anthology of his original photographs. “Jacob A. Riis: Revealing New York’s Other Half” (Yale University Press; $65), by Bonnie Yochelson, evokes too many images that seem all too familiar a century later.From Andy Warhol’s house to Keith Haring’s Pop Shop, “Unforgotten New York” redeems its subtitle: “Legendary Spaces of the 20th-Century Avant-Garde” (Prestel; $39.95). David Brun-Lambert, John Short and David Tanguy spent two years tracing pop culture’s mythical venues, which spurred the creative process and which, they write, “have been reappropriated, redeveloped and mostly forgotten.”Public architecture, Daniel Patrick Moynihan observed, “is the bone and muscle of democracy.” This quotation animates the preface by Chief Judge Robert A. Katzmann of the United States Court of Appeals in Manhattan for “Courthouses of the Second Circuit: Their Architecture, History and Stories” (Federal Bar Association and Acanthus Press; $65). The book lavishly depicts the illustrious halls of justice (the majestic exteriors sometimes seen on the opening credits of television shows, the stately interiors rarely, if at all) where the body of laws are adjudicated.As sylvan escape or jostling playground, Central Park has inspired painters from Milton Avery to William Zorach. Robert F. Pasquier explores New York’s premier oasis through their prism in “Painting Central Park” (the Vendome Press; $60), an evocative visual festival. As early as 1862, Harper’s Monthly called the park itself “the finest work of art ever executed in this country.”By the end of the 1880s, West 72nd Street was still so remote that Henry J. Hardenberg’s hulking new apartment building bordering Central Park was dubbed the Dakota.Andrew Alpern, an architectural historian, invites readers inside the storied pioneer of apartment houses in “The Dakota: A History of the World’s Best-Known Apartment Building” (Princeton Architectural Press; $55).The Dakota became “the Dowager Queen Mother of apartment houses,” Mr. Alpern writes, but Manhattan’s first multifamily residence that was qualitatively superior to the tenement was the Stuyvesant Apartments at 142 East 18th Street in 1869.The High Line is an architectural miracle that many New Yorkers now take for granted: the conversion of a derelict, elevated rail-freight line on Manhattan’s West Side into an innovative promenade and spur for development. “The High Line: Foreseen. Unforeseen” (James Corner Field Operations, Diller Scofidio + Renfro; $75) is the designers’ detailed personal account (and manual) for High Line lovers of how imaginative civic leaders and cooperative city planners turned a trestle into a treasure.In the book “Graffiti Murals: Exploring the Impacts of Street Art” (Schiffer Publishing; $29.99), Patrick Verel embraces the vibrant collaboration with building owners to ward off vandalism and vapidity. Based on his master’s thesis at Fordham, it focuses on six sites to make a case that a large mural (a “production”) and even complex stylized lettering (a “piece”) are artistically and socially more valuable than merely a writer’s signature (a “tag”) or a blank wall.How many New Yorkers have visited the United Nations headquarters since their school field trip? “The United Nations at 70: Restoration and Renewal” (Rizzoli International Publications; $55), with essays by Martti Ahtisaari and Carter Wiseman, offers an insider’s guided tour during and after renovations of what Mr. Wiseman writes is the one building that “can claim its place on the list of international landmarks as a symbol of the world’s most enduring aspiration: peace.”“All the paintings in museums around the world,” writes the artist James Rosenquist, “are merely minerals mixed mostly in oil, smeared on cloth by the hairs from the back of a pig’s ear.” The difference between a schmeerer and a painter is elucidated in “Art Students League of New York on Painting: Lessons and Meditations on Mediums, Styles and Methods” (Watson-Guptill Publications; $35), by James L. McElhinney. Instructors from the league (where Mr. Rosenquist studied) explain their practices and philosophy.