Some of the team behind the new Broadway musical “Allegiance” seems a little nervous — worried that people will assume the show is a downer when they hear it’s set in one of the internment camps where Japanese-American citizens were imprisoned by the federal government during World War II.So they’re pretty insistent that history serves merely as a backdrop. Really, said Lorenzo Thione, one of the lead producers and also a co-writer of the book, “Allegiance” is about universal uplifting themes: family, hope, redemption, love. “It’s as much about the Japanese-American internment as ‘Miss Saigon’ is about the Vietnam War,” he said.Well, don’t tell George Takei. The actor, famous for nearly 50 years as Sulu, the “Star Trek” helmsman, is making his Broadway debut at 78 in “Allegiance,” which from its inception was inspired by his family’s experience in the camps. He had just turned 5 when he, his parents and his two younger siblings were rounded up and taken from their Los Angeles home in 1942. He was nearly 9 when they left the barbed wire and barracks behind.“My intention was for this story to be known by all Americans — it’s our Constitution that was egregiously violated,” Mr. Takei (pronounced ta-KAY) said on a recent morning in his Manhattan apartment, where he served green tea and chestnut-filled manju, a favorite confection sent by a fan in Japan. “Allegiance,” opening Nov. 8 at the Longacre Theater, is set mostly in the early 1940s, when a California farming family is ripped from its home and sent to an internment camp in Wyoming. Mr. Takei plays the grandfather, a gentle and spirited man who quietly cultivates cheer in the midst of desolation.In the 21st-century scenes that bookend the show, he also plays Sam Kimura, the family’s fiery grandson, now a gray-haired World War II veteran. Telly Leung (“Glee”) plays the younger version of the grandson, with the Tony Award winner Lea Salonga (“Miss Saigon”) as his sister.During the war, the government relocated about 120,000 people of Japanese descent on the West Coast to internment camps in what Mr. Takei called “an act of pure, irrational, mad, racist hysteria.” Raising awareness about the issue is his “life mission,” he said in that smooth baritone, so familiar from Starfleet chatter aboard the U.S.S. Enterprise.A model of that starship is on display in his living room, a token of his fondness for the series and gratitude for the life it enabled him to build. Along with his voluble social-media presence, which began in 2011 as a strategy to raise his profile in the run-up to “Allegiance,” his Sulu cachet is important to selling the show, which has gone so far as to have designated Halloween as “Star Trek” night.“The fans are going to come as who they really are: as Klingon warriors or as Andorian princesses or as Starfleet officers,” said Mr. Takei, who is an awfully good sport even when local television hosts come back from a commercial break dressed in Trekkie drag — which, yes, has happened to him lately.He was in a more serious mode as he talked about the internment camps, yet his recollections of them were often surprisingly warm: the memories of a little boy whose parents shielded him from their own anguish. They allowed him to find joy and adventure in what he calls his “childhood imprisonment,” when his family was shipped off first to Rohwer, Ark., and later to a high-security camp in Tule Lake, Calif., where the watchtowers became a normal part of his landscape.Those years of his life were a strange mix of sweetness and horror. Ask him about his first day of school, and he will recall being dropped off by his father, who hovered nearby and consoled him when he got scared. But the kindergartners were all fresh internees, their classroom a spot on the cement underneath the grandstand at the Santa Anita racetrack in California. The track served as a holding place for a few months while construction on the camps was being completed.“We were housed in the horse stables,” Mr. Takei said. “Can you imagine, for my parents to be taken from a two-bedroom home in Los Angeles, with their three children, and to sleep in this smelly horse stall? But to me as a 5-year-old kid: ‘I get to sleep where the horsies sleep! I can even smell them!’ For my parents, it was degrading, dehumanizing; it was a horrible experience. But my memory is that it was fun.”A sense of fun is also part of “Allegiance,” because for its characters life does go on inside the camp. Like the teenagers Mr. Takei remembers from internment, the young people in the musical enjoy dances and romances. Like his mother, who smuggled her portable sewing machine into the camps and made curtains for the family’s barracks, the internees try to add beauty to the place where they find themselves.For Mr. Takei, “Allegiance” is a rare foray onto the New York stage, where he first appeared as a replacement in the Off Broadway civil-rights musical “Fly Blackbird!” in 1962. He has more recent theater credits from both America and England, but he is more often found in the audience. Ordinarily, he said, he’s at a show almost nightly when he’s in town.With music and lyrics by Jay Kuo, who wrote the book with Marc Acito and Mr. Thione, “Allegiance” was born of a pair of fortuitous encounters in 2008. At a performance of “Forbidden Broadway,” Mr. Takei and his husband, Brad Takei, fell into conversation with Mr. Kuo and Mr. Thione, who were sitting in front of them. The next night, they bumped into one another again at “In the Heights,” where the father’s song “Inutil” moved Mr. Takei to tears. (“I’m a weeper,” he said.)As he explained to his new acquaintances at intermission, the song reminded him of a discussion he once had with his own father about a loyalty questionnaire the government forced internees to answer. It was the beginning of a conversation about internment that would lead to the notion of a musical, though Mr. Takei initially thought a straight drama was a better idea.Mr. Thione said what most moved him and Mr. Kuo was “the spirit of resilience, the spirit of optimism” in what Mr. Takei was telling them. “We knew from the beginning that the story hadn’t touched us because it was dark or depressing or sad.”They also knew it would be difficult to bring a new musical, set in a little-known chapter of American history, to a wide audience — so Mr. Thione set about building Mr. Takei’s playful and now wildly successful social-media presence as a means of broadening his fan base.“Allegiance” had its premiere in 2012 at the Old Globe Theater in San Diego, directed by Stafford Arima, whose Japanese-Canadian father was interned as a teenager in Canada during the war. When he was growing up, Mr. Arima said, the family didn’t discuss it — a common experience, according to Mr. Takei. When Mr. Arima overheard references to camp, he assumed it was summer camp.Mr. Arima, who has been with the project from the start, is drawn to musical theater pieces that have some kind of social message. Still, he said, “the trepidation of taking on a subject matter that has never in the history of the Broadway musical been realized is pretty extraordinary.”An important plot point concerns the loyalty questionnaire, which in real life, as in the show, contained two highly divisive questions. One asked internees to pledge loyalty to the United States and “forswear” loyalty to the emperor of Japan — an incriminating formulation that presumes a pre-existing loyalty to the emperor. The other question asked if they would serve in the armed forces.Mr. Takei’s American-born mother and Japanese-born father agonized about how to respond. On principle, they answered no to both, which is why their family was transferred to the high-security camp. There, under pressure, Mr. Takei’s mother renounced her citizenship, which she would later fight to regain.As a teenager, though, he couldn’t grasp how defiant his parents had been. He still chokes up when he recalls a vicious bit of adolescent venom for which he never apologized: accusing his father of leading the family “like sheep to slaughter by taking us into the internment camp.”But his father didn’t want an alienated son with a victim mentality, Mr. Takei said; he wanted a child who was engaged in shaping American democracy. So he took young George down to Adlai Stevenson’s presidential campaign office and had him volunteer to help. He’s been a liberal activist ever since, viewing various forms of bigotry as all of a piece.There was one civil-rights battle he held at arm’s length, though. Even in “To the Stars,” his 1994 autobiography, there is no hint of its importance to him. “I was closeted for most of my life,” Mr. Takei said. “There I was, speaking out on issues of war and peace, rights and outrageous inequality. The issue closest to me I was silent on.”He remembers hearing about the Stonewall riots on the gay-bar circuit in 1969, the year “Star Trek” was canceled, and wanted to get involved. But he feared for his livelihood — one he always felt lucky to have, given the paucity of roles for Asian-Americans — and remained fearful for decades.Then in 2005, Arnold Schwarzenegger, the governor of California, vetoed a marriage-equality bill. Mr. Takei was finally so furious that he summoned his courage and came out, expecting it would kill his career.Instead, it has flourished, and he’s found a new kind of freedom in being able to fully be himself, no longer constantly on guard.“That chunk of my life, I’m keeping notes on a second, fuller autobiography,” he said, and laughed. “The next one is going to be called ‘Down to Earth.’ ”