On Feb. 3, concertgoers will walk into a world of Jazz Age beauty at the newly renovated Kings Theater on Flatbush Avenue in Brooklyn. A grand lobby of walnut-paneled walls and Corinthian columns will be lit from above by massive Art Deco chandeliers, and almost 4,000 feet of newly woven gold and scarlet carpet — reconstructed from a remnant discovered beneath an old candy counter — will stretch underfoot. The theater’s grand reopening, 86 years after it was first introduced to the public, will feature a performance by Diana Ross.Sept. 28, 1929, saw a similar celebration in Journal Square in Jersey City. Just a month before the stock market crashed, people streamed through the gleaming brass doors of the Loew’s Jersey for its grand opening. The approximately 3,000-seat movie theater rivaled the opulence and glamour of Radio City Music Hall. According to advertisements in The Jersey Journal, patrons were treated to a stage revue, orchestral performance, live jazz band, acrobats, comedians, chorus girls and the new MGM movie “Madame X,” starring Ruth Chatterton, all for either 25 or 35 cents, depending on the seat.Reports of the theater opening describe an eight-foot, 150-year-old French Buhl clock, Dresden porcelain vases from the Vanderbilt mansion, bronze statues from France, crimson curtains embroidered with gold griffins and a turquoise-tiled Carrera marble fountain filled with goldfish. And that was just the lobby.The Kings and the Jersey are two of the five “Wonder Theaters” built in the New York area by the Loew’s Corporation in 1929 and 1930. The other three, currently managed by religious groups, are the Valencia on Jamaica Avenue in Queens, the United Palace on 175th Street and Broadway in Manhattan and the Paradise on the Grand Concourse in the Bronx.The trajectory of the Kings Theater, with its $95 million renovation, is being watched closely in Jersey City, where the Loew’s Jersey is at a crossroads. The municipal government and the Friends of the Loew’s, a community group, have for years been battling over how the theater should be managed and by whom. If the Kings renaissance succeeds, it may well tip the balance in that dispute. Gary Martinez, the president of Martinez & Johnson Architecture, who along with ACE Theatrical Group of Houston renovated the Kings, seems to understand the stakes. “This case here will be the study for the next one. Wherever that may be,” he said.The architect George Rapp, whose firm designed the Jersey and the Kings in a French Renaissance style, called his spaces “a shrine to democracy where there are no privileged patrons.”“The wealthy,” he said, “rub elbows with the poor — and are better for this contact.”Whether the rich and poor will mingle at the Kings in Brooklyn — and whether the newly refurbished theater will alter the local economy — remains to be seen. But there clearly has been an effort.“It’s going to revitalize Flatbush Avenue,” Eric L. Adams, the borough president, said of the new Kings, which was the result of a public-private collaboration of ACE Theatrical Group, Goldman Sachs Urban Investment Group, the National Development Council, the New York City Economic Development Corporation and community groups. Public money is being provided by the city through the mayor’s office, the Brooklyn borough president’s office, the City Council and Councilman Mathieu Eugene, and by the state.The renovation effort was herculean, according to Mr. Martinez. When it started two years ago, he said, workers discovered that water had corroded vast sections of decorative plaster, carpets squished underfoot, light fixtures had been torn from the walls, pigeons roosted in the ceiling and a naked man was found curled up on the stage, alive but startled when police officers and two workers woke him.The theater is now gleaming and is part of a gentrifying borough, but will it persuade today’s Netflix generation to spend time and money there?Things were different in the 1920s, when theaters were a conspicuous element of the urban landscape, according to the Brooklyn borough historian, Ron Schweiger, who said there were at least six theaters within a few blocks of the Kings in its heyday. In 1929, The Jersey Journal’s entertainment section regularly listed showings at a dozen theaters besides the Loew’s Jersey, including two other major spaces in Journal Square: the State (demolished in 1997) and the Stanley (now a Jehovah’s Witnesses meeting hall).But the Wonder Theaters were of a higher caliber. Designed by world-class architects, the theaters flouted the tedium and hopelessness of the Great Depression — and later the anxieties of World War II — by providing the common citizen with an affordable escape into Hollywood fantasy and luxurious surroundings.The Paradise and the Valencia were “atmospheric theaters” designed by John Eberson. Later surveys by the New York Landmarks Conservancy describe the Valencia as modeled on a Spanish villa and the Paradise on a Venetian doge’s palace: Both auditoriums provided 360-degree trompe l’oeil visions of Old World courtyards, covered in artificial vines and plants and populated by stuffed birds, some affixed on wires in mid-flight. Where the roof ended, an evening sky began, dotted with electric stars. When the lights dimmed, they did so slowly, changing color to mimic a sunset.Manhattan’s Loew’s 175th (now the United Palace Theater), designed by Thomas W. Lamb, was a kitchen-sink masterpiece that defied concise description for decades until David W. Dunlap, a reporter for The New York Times, called it “Byzantine-Romanesque-Indo-Hindu-Sino-Moorish-Persian-Eclectic-Rococo-Deco” in his 1990 book, “On Broadway: A Journey Uptown Over Time.”At a Wonder Theater, local kids could spend an afternoon submerged in fantasy for a small portion of their allowance. For a few of them, the experience possibly served as inspiration: Frank Sinatra saw Bing Crosby sing at the Jersey; Stanley Kubrick saw his first blockbusters at the Paradise; and Barbra Streisand regularly attended Saturday matinees at the Kings.The theaters also served as community centers. According to The Brooklyn Eagle, the Kings held fashion shows for local merchants, bridge lessons for older people and Christmas parties for orphans. Its ushers even fielded a basketball team against ushers from other Brooklyn theaters, practicing on an indoor court in the Kings basement. The court was replaced by bathroom stalls in the recent renovation.During World War II, people went to their Loew’s to watch newsreels. Weeping mothers were honored in gold star ceremonies. In 1944, according to The Bronx Home News, Mayor Fiorello La Guardia explained air raid blackout procedures to an audience at the Paradise: “Don’t be a wise guy and get killed. Be prudent and live.” In an example of the wealthy rubbing elbows with the poor, some wise guy stole the mayor’s hat during his speech.Beginning in the 1960s, middle-class families moved to the suburbs and the neighborhoods declined, as did the Wonder Theaters. The advent of television made selling 3,000 tickets to a single screen difficult. The age of the multiplex arrived, and theaters around the country, including the Jersey and the Paradise, were robbed of their grandeur by division: first as duplexes, then as triplexes and sometimes as quads.From the late 1960s through the ’80s, the Wonder Theaters became gum-encrusted ratholes for slasher movies, and the carpets squished with cola syrup. The Times reported that in 1970 a pipe bomb exploded in the orchestra at the Paradise. The jaded Bronx audience assumed it was a firecracker and continued watching the film, nearly rioting when the police ordered them to leave. In 1988, The Times reported a fatal gunfight between the police and gang members that had erupted in the balcony.Failed attempts were made to improve the neighborhoods, even as dive bars, fast-food restaurants and 99-cent stores grew around the theaters. In the mid-1960s the traffic dividers on the Grand Concourse in the Bronx were painted green to mimic its long-vanished plants, according to “Boulevard of Dreams,” a book by Constance Rosenblum.As these neighborhoods and their Wonder Theaters struggled economically, peddlers of storefront salvation moved in. Empty theaters were seen as ideal modern temples for some affluent churches, whose religious status exempted them from taxes on the mammoth properties.In 1969, Loew’s sold the 175th Street Theater to Frederick J. Eikerenkoetter II, better known as “Reverend Ike,” who packed the theater for his sermons on “thinkonomics,” and in 1977 the Loew’s Corporation donated the Valencia in Queens to a church called the Tabernacle of Prayer for All People.The ministry made some changes, notably creating a gallery of discarded crutches and casts in the lobby as evidence of healing miracles. A row of nude Roman gods atop the proscenium ran counter to the church’s strict Pentecostalism, so they were wrapped in cloaks and fitted with wings.But most of the theater was, to the relief of conservationists, maintained.“We want that building to stay the way we found it,” said Priscilla Cyrus, a minister and longtime board member of the church. “Loew’s thought it was their theater, but it was like it was created for us.”Today the Valencia is empty most of the time. The church still owns and manages the space, though its congregation has shrunk from 7,000 members to about 300, according to Ms. Cyrus.She also said that the theater required a new heating and air-conditioning system that would cost about $400,000. For now, services are being held in the basement of an office building. The church refuses to raise money by renting the theater for concerts or functions, concerned that third parties would not share the moral strictures of its members’ faith. As a result, no secular performer has appeared on the Valencia’s stage in more than 30 years.In 2005 the Paradise in the Bronx reopened, and for six years it was a venue for Latin music and boxing. But the crowds did not come, and in 2012 the Rev. Creflo A. Dollar Jr. and his World Changers Church moved in. In contrast to the beleaguered Tabernacle at the Valencia, business for the World Changers Church at the Paradise is booming. The box office is now a “prayer station,” and the lobby features a gift shop selling T-shirts, books and souvenirs.At the United Palace on 175th, Reverend Ike’s son Xavier Eikerenkoetter is now the head of the church, whose congregation, like the Tabernacle’s, is dwindling. But unlike the Valencia and the Paradise, there is a mutually beneficial agreement in place at the Palace.Church functions are organized under the rubric of the United Palace House of Inspiration. The United Palace Theater, an in-house booking agency, puts on concerts by big-name acts like Neil Young, Iggy Pop, Bob Dylan, Adele and Kraftwerk. And in 2012 the building added a community programming operation, the United Palace of Cultural Arts, that shows films, runs after-school art and performance classes and produces community events like the recent “Hip-Hop Nutcracker.”“This was built as the place for the neighborhood to congregate,” said Mike Fitelson, executive director of the United Palace of Cultural Arts. “We’re just beginning to drag this beauty into the 21st century.”What’s happening at the United Palace is the sort of balance of profit and nonprofit, corporate and community, that the Friends of the Loew’s has been describing as its vision for the Jersey.Founded by Colin Egan and Patti Giordan, Friends of the Loew’s saved the building from demolition in the 1980s and convinced the city to buy it. Since then, the organization has managed to partially restore the building to just the right side of operational.When the lights were first turned back on, fuses “popped like popcorn,” Mr. Egan said. The projection booth was a guano-encrusted pigeon coop. Thick deposits of orange nicotine had to be scraped from the plaster. Layers of paint, laid in the days when the bathrooms were graffiti canvases, were patiently stripped from marble fixtures. The laborious process of renovating the seats continues today. The Jersey now holds regular screenings, community events and private functions, all organized by the Friends. In the coming months the theater will host, among other things, an Egyptian cultural conference, several weddings and a local theater company’s play about Nelson Mandela.On some nights, the Jersey is a cinema purist’s dream: a place to eat popcorn from a cardboard box and watch an original print of a silent film shown through a carbon-arc projector with music and sound effects provided by a Wonder Morton Organ, the only one still operating in a Wonder Theater. Silent classics including “Nosferatu” and “Metropolis” drew big crowds last year. But these are no-frills events: The tickets come in perforated rolls, the candy is on a table rather than behind glass and the soda is in a cooler. The theater still lacks a sprinkler system, air-conditioning, smoke detectors, a stable balcony or the financial means to acquire them. The Friends, despite having put on a few concerts by acts like Beck and Bright Eyes, has been admonished by one government administration after another for not doing enough.Last spring, Mayor Steven M. Fulop issued a request for proposals to renovate and manage the theater. A city-appointed panel selected ACE Theatrical (again with Martinez & Johnson Architecture) for the renovation, partly because of its success with the Kings, although in this case the national concert promoter AEG Entertainment was chosen to manage the theater. The Friends challenged the decision, arguing that a nonprofit organization should be in charge. But Mayor Fulop is concerned about fully exploiting the theater’s ability to make money.“You look at the numbers that they did last year and I think it was approximately 10,000 people,” he said. “That theater’s capable of 10,000 people in a weekend.”He said he wanted the Friends group to be part of the process of restoring the theater. “But at the same time,” he said, “I can’t responsibly put in $40 million and turn the keys over to somebody that doesn’t have a proven track record in managing a venue that size on a consistent basis.”Mr. Egan’s concerns go beyond the bottom line. “AEG can do the job in terms of big shows and churning through numbers that in one sense justifies putting a lot of money into the Loew’s,” he said. “But you can’t have the theater doing what it’s supposed to do for the local community if all you look at is the cost-benefit analysis of putting people in Journal Square.”The restoration of the Kings has bolstered Mayor Fulop’s plan. But the Friends’ connection to the theater runs deep, and the Jersey remains the only Wonder Theater operated by a local nonreligious group whose mission is to make it as much of a community center as it was in its prime.People sometimes ask Mr. Egan if the theater is haunted. “No,” he said. “But I’m not dead yet.”