RE: G.O.P.Robert Draper wrote about several foreign-policy advisers to Republican candidates and the lessons of Iraq.Barack Obama won the White House on the basis of his principled opposition to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and any Republican who hopes to succeed him will have to affirm that toppling Saddam Hussein was a colossal blunder. When former Senator Jim Talent says, ‘‘We can’t spend the next term with everybody pointing fingers about what went wrong with Iraq,’’ he reflects the Republicans’ overall failure to raise the discourse to the strategic level. The decision to blow up Iraq a dozen years ago — on the basis of flimsy intelligence and the harebrained idea that the currents of culture and history could be rerouted by armed force — created a hothouse environment for terrorism, unleashed a transnational sectarian civil war and removed the most important counterweight to Iran. The effects of this mistake will resonate for decades to come. If the Republicans are to win back their brand as the ‘‘pros from Dover’’ on national security, regaining our confidence must begin with their sober recognition of George W. Bush’s folly. John Arquilla, Monterey, Calif.The 2003 invasion of Iraq was not simply ‘‘reckless,’’ as Robert Draper asserts more than once: It was deliberately mendacious, impelled by intentionally skewed intelligence, for which no single administration official was held accountable.When will advisers, candidates, journalists and historians get the history right? Until they do, our country has no hope whatsoever in having a cogent discussion about how to deal with ISIS, let alone organizing an adequate defense. The invasion equation the candidates and their advisers need is to add, subtract, multiply and divide accurately, not spin fantasy math yet again. Victoria C. Bond, New YorkNo Republican presidential candidate expounds a foreign policy that honors the philosophy and sacrifices of the American Revolution: aggressive self-defense. As Secretary of State John Quincy Adams elaborated in an 1821 address to Congress: Our glory is liberty, not world domination or force; we celebrate the march of the mind, not the march of the soldier. According to Adams, the United States wishes freedom and independence to flourish everywhere, but we fight only to defend our own to avoid the self-ruination of chronic conflict. As Alexis de Tocqueville observed in ‘‘Democracy in America,’’ ‘‘All those who seek to destroy the liberties of a democratic nation ought to know that war is the surest and shortest means to accomplish it.’’ Bruce Fein, WashingtonRE: THE ETHICISTSThe ethicists explored whether a young gay man should remain closeted in order to continue getting money for his college education from his father.The fundamental question here is whether there are circumstances when it is ethical to deceive a donor or lender because the terms are objectionable. I think the answer is ‘‘no.’’ A recipient must, in order to maintain her integrity and dignity, be honest in accepting the money. I agree that the donor here is acting unethically, but his behavior is unlikely to make his son feel better in compromising his own ethics. The father will have to live with himself and his actions, just as the son must live with his deception. Susan Quill, Chevy Chase, Md.Straight-out lying about your sexual preference in order to retain Dad’s favor is a prescription for a lifetime of deceit and, perhaps, self-loathing. The honorable thing to do, the decent thing to do, is to say something like: ‘‘Dad, I’m gay. Get over it. If you want to continue helping me, fine. If not, I’ll figure out how to make it on my own.’’ That kind of determination would be a solid step into true adulthood. And who knows? Someday his dad might come to respect his son for his honesty. Even if not, the son would be able to respect himself. Mike Moore, Green Valley, Ariz.Since when do parents have an obligation to financially support their adult children? It’s admirable and wonderful, and yes, our system of university financing is backward, but does that create an obligation for parents? If so, then surely parents who fail to earn enough to pay college tuition for their children must be a disappointment, if not neglectful. Sean Hale, Austin, Tex.