Tucked between flashier Chinese and Indian restaurants on Second Avenue on the Upper East Side of Manhattan is an unassuming storefront whose only markings are a simple awning and two blue neon words in the window: “Burmese Cooking.” The restaurant, Cafe Mingala, is so narrow and dwarfed by its neighbors that you’d probably never notice it. If you did pass it by, you’d miss out on New York City’s only dedicated Burmese restaurant.A few other restaurants do serve some Burmese dishes, and a pop-up restaurant, Burma Noodle Bar, recently appeared in Brooklyn. But Cafe Mingala has been open for 22 years, solely serving dishes from Myanmar. At Cafe Mingala, you can find the same festival noodle fish soup and tea leaf and ginger salads that are so popular in the crowded night markets of Yangon. (Or is it Rangoon?)Wind chimes sound as you enter, and suddenly you feel as if you’ve stepped back three decades in time. The interior has an old-school kitschy ambience with maroon tablecloths and booths covered in floral upholstery. The walls are devoted to murals of Myanmar’s historic sites, like the stilt villages of Inle Lake and the massive golden spire of Shwedagon Pagoda.On a recent, chilly Wednesday night, Andrew Moe, the restaurant’s manager, greeted a group of three: “Long time no see!” The restaurant was warm and filled with sweet and salty smells. Small groups chattered in booths over flounder wrapped in banana leaf or bowls of Oun-No-Kow-Swear, a coconut noodle soup that comes with the traditional bowls of garnishes: lemon, pepper, crispy onion, cilantro and half a boiled egg.Mr. Moe, 37, said that most of Cafe Mingala’s customers were regulars from the neighborhood. The party of three were archaeologists, some of whom worked nearby at Hunter College. One of them, Cherra Wyllie, said she had probably been coming to the restaurant for over 20 years. Anne Turner, another regular who lives nearby, guessed that she came between two and four times a week. “It feels like home,” she said.When asked what had changed about the restaurant in the past decades, Mr. Moe was matter-of-fact: “It’s the same, it never changes. Very traditional.” The staff is another constant. Mr. Moe and a waiter, Jeffrey Fisher, both hail from Myanmar’s capital, Yangon, and have worked together for 10 years. The prices also seem stuck in time: the lunch special, an entree with a soup or salad, is $6.95.The customers are the only change that Mr. Moe will acknowledge. Since the United States renewed relations with Myanmar several years ago, after its government made gestures toward democracy, Mr. Moe has noticed that customers ask more questions about the country’s politics and culture. Until recently, very few of his customers knew anything about Myanmar. (For the record, Mr. Moe has a hard time calling the country by the name the military junta gave it in 1989. “To me,” he said, “it is always Burma.”)Food bloggers have called Burmese food the “Holy Grail” of the New York culinary scene, and the opening of Burma Noodle Bar may signal a new wave approaching. Mr. Moe said business had been especially good over the past few years.Recently, after the lunch rush, Mr. Moe sat in the back of the restaurant eating boiled fish and vegetables near two cooks, from Myanmar’s Shan State, who spoke quietly in Burmese over steaming bowls of noodle soup. When asked if Cafe Mingala would do anything to accommodate potential new customers, Mr. Moe looked around the restaurant and said, “We never change.”