ATHENS —  Greeks delivered a shocking rebuff to Europe’s leaders on Sunday, decisively rejecting a deal offered by the country’s creditors in a historic vote that could redefine Greece’s place in Europe and shake the Continent’s financial stability.As people gathered to celebrate in Syntagma Square in central Athens, the Interior Ministry reported that with more than 90 percent of the vote tallied, 61 percent of the voters had said no to a deal that would have imposed greater austerity measures.The no votes carried virtually every district in the country, handing a sweeping victory to Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, a leftist who came to power in January vowing to reject new austerity measures, which he called an injustice and economically self-defeating. Last month he walked away from negotiations in frustration at the creditors’ demands, called the referendum and urged Greeks to vote no as a way to give him more bargaining power.While Mr. Tsipras now appears to have gotten his wish, his victory in the referendum settled little, since the creditors’ offer is no longer on the table. There remains the possibility that they could walk away, leaving Greece facing default, financial collapse, and expulsion from the eurozone and, in the worst case, from the European Union.Mr. Tsipras went on television briefly to say he would resume negotiations immediately. He said that the vote was not a mandate for “rupture” with Europe. “The people today replied to the right question,” he said. “They did not answer to the question in or out of the euro. This question needs to be taken out of the discussion, once and for all.”At stake, however, may be far more than Greece’s place in Europe, as experts have offered wildly differing opinions about what the referendum could mean for the future of the euro and the world’s financial markets. In Asia on Monday, most markets opened slightly lower.Even before the voting was over, some European leaders began trying to contain the potential damage. Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany said she would meet Monday with the French president, François Hollande, for a “joint assessment of the situation.” Later, the two leaders called for a European Union summit meeting on Tuesday.To some, the vote was virtually a point of no return. Germany’s economy minister, Sigmar Gabriel, who is also the leader of the Social Democrats, said it was hard to see how talks could resume on a bailout deal. “Tsipras and his government are leading the Greek people on a path of bitter abandonment and hopelessness,” he told the newspaper Tagesspiegel, adding that they have “torn down the last bridges on which Greece and Europe could have moved toward a compromise.”The vote took place under what some analysts called a financial carpet bombing. The European Central Bank severely limited financial assistance to Greek banks, forcing them to close a week before the referendum, making it hard for retirees to get their money and raising widespread fear here that people would lose their deposits.The news media, dominated by Greek oligarchs, were saturated with stories about losing gasoline and medicines, while the plight of retirees was afforded far more attention than in the past, media experts said.Nonetheless, many voters, tired of more than five years of soaring unemployment and a collapsing economy, said they could not accept the terms of the European offer, which imposed yet more pension cuts and tax increases, without debt relief.As word spread of a likely victory for the no vote, people began gathering in Syntagma Square. They streamed out of the metro — which is free in this week of capital controls — and drove by, honking horns. Vendors sold Greek flags, and there was a celebratory atmosphere.People made speeches. Some remembered that at the beginning of the crisis in 2011 Syntagma became a gathering place for protesters. But in those days it was a scary place, they said.While there had been speculation about Mr. Tsipras stepping down in the event of a yes vote, the man he succeeded as prime minister, Antonis Samaras, the leader of the New Democracy Party, announced his resignation, saying, “I understand that our great party needs a new start.”For some voters, the week of hardship — they could withdraw only 60 euros, or about $67, a day from A.T.M.s, and already some pharmacists were refusing to fill prescriptions — only strengthened their sense that Greece needed to stand up for itself.After five years in which unemployment soared beyond 20 percent and the country’s economy contracted by 25 percent, many said that a no vote was at least a vote for hope, the possibility of a new deal, rather than following the mandates of creditors who had failed to set Greece on a course to recovery.For others, the hardship proved only that Greece, like it or not, was in the hands of its creditors and could do little but take whatever terms were being offered — the alternative of default, financial collapse and withdrawal from the euro being unthinkable. Many blamed Mr. Tsipras’s government for having returned the country to recession when it had shown hints of recovery just before the January elections.At a polling place near the archaeological museum in Athens, turnout was low, poll workers said. And people coming out of the voting booths seemed split.“I voted with my heart and also my mind,” said Marie Triadafillou, who works in transportation logistics and voted yes. “I believe when you are in a union you cannot leave. We say in our country if the sheep leaves the flock it cannot live.”Yet others felt that the referendum was not about staying in the eurozone but simply part of the long negotiations between Greece and its creditors.Since Mr. Tsipras broke off talks, European officials have refused to negotiate further and to extend a deadline for the last bailout program, setting up a decision by the European Central Bank to cap its emergency support to Greek banks. This forced the government to close the banks for fear of extended bank runs.At a polling site in a middle-class Athens neighborhood, Baizar Tazerian, 76, said that she was angered by what she believed had been European interference in the ballot and that she had just voted to reject the deal.“ ‘No’ means that we don’t have to say yes to whatever they are saying,” she said.Pantiotis Andrikopoulos, 33, a student, said in southern Athens that he planned to vote no “because I don’t like being blackmailed by the E.U.” He did not buy European arguments that a no vote meant Greeks wanted to leave the eurozone.He was also not worried that Greek banks would remain closed if the no vote prevailed. “I don’t believe that,” he said. “They’re trying to terrorize people with such talk.”In Ilisia, another middle-class neighborhood, the poet Titos Patrikios, 87, voted at a school surrounded by pink and white oleander.Mr. Patrikios seemed to embody much of his country’s modern history. As a teenager during World War II, he took part in the resistance against the German occupation. After the civil war, he was imprisoned for his leftist sympathies. And after the military seized power in 1967, he was forced into exile.Mr. Patrikios urged people to vote their consciences. “I vote yes because the real dilemma is inside or outside of Europe,” Mr. Patrikios said. “In Europe, things are difficult sometimes, they are critical. But outside Europe is the catastrophe. So we have to choose between catastrophe and difficult.”He added that the most important thing was to avoid pitting Greeks against Greeks, but that he was not too worried: “I suffer from one illness, and that is incurable optimism.”Athanasis Chryssochoidis, 76, a retiree, said Greece was being made an example in case other Southern European nations tried to challenge the dictates of the eurozone.“Tsipras and all of them want to negotiate,” he said. “But as soon as they said yes to something, the Europeans put up more demands. The issue is that Syriza is a left party and they don’t want such mischief.”“We’ve reached our limit,” Mr. Chryssochoidis said. “This is not a society of beggars.”