For the many thousands who flood the streets of central Brooklyn in the darkness of the first hours of Labor Day, it is a release: a chance to celebrate, in costume or out, and dance to melodies and rhythms of the Caribbean.But seemingly every year, violence intrudes on the margins of J’ouvert, a predawn carnival procession of live music and white puffs of baby powder thrown into the air like magic dust that precedes the West Indian American Day Parade.Early Monday morning, in a wild hail of gunfire flying between rival gang members, the police said, Carey Gabay, an aide to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, was struck in the head by a bullet as he stood on Bedford Avenue near the J’ouvert route.With Mr. Gabay, 43, still in critical condition, debate flared in Brooklyn on Tuesday over whether the annual festivities should be held up for blame — and perhaps altered as a result of the violence — or whether the mayhem instead represented a lamentably ordinary occurrence in a city where, though shootings are at near-record lows, 969 people have been shot this year.The police commissioner, William J. Bratton, told reporters on Tuesday that the parade and surrounding events are “our most violent public event in the city,” adding that “some of it has to do with the fact that it’s an overnight event.”Because there is no political or community interest in ending the celebrations, Mr. Bratton said, “we will work to the best of our ability to deal with the elements in that community that engage in that violence.”Others, including the organizers of the daylight parade and those who participated in the J’ouvert festivities, which officially began around 4 a.m., were quick to distinguish the celebrations from the gunfire that struck Mr. Gabay. Detectives believe the shooting was the result of warring gangs in the area just east of Prospect Park.“We have not experienced any violence, other than what happens on a daily basis in New York City or all over the world,” said Thomas Bailey, the president of the West Indian American Day Carnival Association, which puts on the parade each year. “I don’t think the carnival celebration should be linked to the violence.”It has been more than a decade since deadly violence marred the parade itself, he said, which draws around a million spectators to a dense section of Brooklyn along Eastern Parkway in Crown Heights. In 2003, a man was fatally shot as he tried to climb on a float.But in recent years there have been several eruptions of violence in the area of the parade, either before or after. A woman was killed by a stray bullet as she sat on her front stoop during J’ouvert in 2011, and two men were stabbed to death after the parade ended in 2012.The Police Department, which deploys heavily in the lead-up to the parade and after, has also come under scrutiny after officers posted incendiary Facebook comments in 2011 calling paradegoers “savages” and suggesting officers “let them kill each other.” More than a dozen officers were punished.The city’s West Indian carnival and parade traces its roots to 1920s Harlem, and moved to central Brooklyn in the mid-1960s as a greater number of immigrants from countries including Trinidad and Tobago, Haiti and Jamaica began arriving there.For weeks, men and women prepare feathered costumes and practice steel-drum routines around Brooklyn, occasionally negotiating with the police, who closely monitor those outdoor gatherings that extend into the night. Some said they felt unfairly maligned by comments linking the parade to violence.“People put in a lot of work to do this, and it’s a shame that something like this happens,” said Tom Montvel-Cohen, the manager of the D’Radoes Steel Orchestra, which won the steel pan competition this year. “But what does that have to do with the parade, really?”Councilwoman Laurie Cumbo, who represents the area, said that for “all people of color in Brooklyn, when the carnival is coming, you pray that there is no incident of violence.” No one wants to see anyone hurt, she said, but more than that, “any act of violence has ramifications on the whole race of Caribbean people,” and people will judge the large numbers “who came out to celebrate by the actions of a small minority.”Detectives on Tuesday were looking at the possibility that the gunfire that struck Mr. Gabay around 3:40 a.m. stemmed from a dispute between two rival gangs active in the area: Folk Nation, whose members live in the Ebbets Field Houses, and an affiliate of the Crips that they are alleged to be feuding with, according to a law enforcement official.“This firefight was sparked when two men began arguing on Bedford Avenue,” the official said. A .45-caliber MAC-10 found nearby was not involved in the shooting, a second official said, which appeared to involve more than 27 rounds and possibly three gunmen. Both officials spoke on the condition of anonymity because the investigation was continuing.From Sunday into Monday, the Police Department said officers had arrested 13 people for gun possession, four for assault, one for armed robbery and more than a dozen for misdemeanors in and around the celebrations. Three people were shot, including Mr. Gabay, and two were stabbed. One of the stabbing victims, Josiah Denentro, 24, of the Bronx, died.Eric L. Adams, the Brooklyn borough president, said in a statement on Tuesday that he would convene an “emergency meeting” — including the police and organizers — to review the J’ouvert celebrations and see how violence could be prevented.“From now until the parade next year, we have to address the elephant in the room,” Ms. Cumbo said in an interview. “We should utilize the carnival as a platform to discuss issues of gun violence in Brooklyn.”Rickford Burke, president of the Caribbean Guyana Institute for Democracy, suggested creating “a safe zone” for J’ouvert akin to New Year’s Eve in Times Square, with officers screening those who enter the designated space. “I think we need to move in that direction,” he said. “Something has to be done.”Mr. Bratton, for his part, did not propose new policing strategies on Tuesday, and instead stressed that the events around the West Indian American Day Parade would continue.“That community, that political leadership, are not going to basically stop those celebrations,” Mr. Bratton said. “That’s quite clear. If you think that’s going to happen, you’re out of your mind.”