Many movies inspire visits to a country. Not so “Midnight Express,” adapted by Oliver Stone from Billy Hayes’s memoir recounting his 1970 arrest and imprisonment for attempting to smuggle hashish onto a flight from Istanbul to New York and his escape in 1975.Mr. Hayes, 67, an actor and writer, lives in Southern California with his wife, Wendy West, whom he met at the movie’s Cannes Film Festival premiere in 1978.For the last two years, they have been traveling for the one-man play “Riding the Midnight Express With Billy Hayes.” Following are edited excerpts from a conversation with Mr. Hayes.Q. “Midnight Express” was probably not the greatest promotion for Turkish tourism, and it still comes up in conversation.A. Brilliant film, powerfully made; everyone gave it their heart and soul. It has no good Turks, and the images of Turkey are horrific, and to this day, Turkey is still dealing with this. I was the most hated man in Turkey, because of the sentencing scene in the movie, screaming at the court, “You’re a nation of pigs!” The pain that Turkey went through following the movie, economically, emotionally. People lost their jobs.You’ve been back since and even participated in a Turkish government ceremony in New York.It is such a weight off the shoulders that I am around and to have me raising the Turkish flag on Wall Street (for Turkish Independence Day, Oct. 29, 2014). Now Turks are kind of amazed that I am a real person instead of just this mythical thing. In 2007, I was back in Turkey, doing a press conference during the Second Istanbul Conference on Democracy and Global Security, organized by the Turkish National Police and the Turkish Institute for Police Studies, which was good publicity for Turkey. Billy Hayes talking about how the film does not represent the country. The best thing that could happen is images of Billy Hayes walking down the streets of Istanbul free. That says it: “He’s O.K., we’re O.K.”What is your favorite thing about Istanbul, back then and now?I loved the hash. You ask me, I am going to tell you. And the Galata Bridge, where you see the whole city. Fishermen used to come up with their catch. I also really love the people. They have an energy about them. The history of the city, with those thousand-year-old walls, such an exotic place, with winding, cobblestone streets. In 2007, there was the healing energy of talking to Turkish media, having the Turkish cops take me around. I would love to bring the show there, but there is so much going on politically now.Why should Americans visit Turkey?Istanbul is an amazing city. Then you go out into the country, places like Cappadocia, and down south, along the coast. There’s a hospitality element, always people saying, “Join us.” There are a lot of countries that may not be the best places for Americans right now, but Turkey is not one of them. They love Americans there. They always did.How did your play develop, and what are the plans for 2015?My producer, Barbara Ligeti, developed it for the Edinburgh Fringe Festival, in 2013. We did London, Scotland, Barrow Street Theater in New York, and we were in Rochester’s Downstairs Cabaret Theater. March 25 to April 12 I am at the Melbourne International Comedy Festival. We are still talking about other locations.One of the jails you were in is now a Four Seasons.I only spent one night there, the Sultanahmet Jail, before being transferred. We walked by in 2007. The guard was like, “Americans, have you been here before?” I said, “It’s a really long story.”You’re a baby boomer. What is it like now traveling at retirement age?New places, with new people. It’s like I am 18 or 19 again, and loving being on the road. Retirement? I don’t know what retirement is.What’s your routine for staying fit while traveling?All I need is Wendy and my yoga mat, and I can go anywhere. If I can’t go on stage, the show doesn’t go on. So I really am into keeping healthy. The vitamins, the food. I am really aware when I travel of not hurting things. I don’t want to be taking drugs for things. It’s a little bit ironic.Your story is every parent’s worst nightmare about their young adult children traveling.I get so many parents telling me, “We make our kids watch your movie.” My life at the very least is a cautionary tale.