Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Soccer’s democracy at work.Sepp Blatter, the president of FIFA, the sport’s global governing body, is expected to defeat his only challenger for a fifth term in a vote today.Each of FIFA’s 209 member associations has one vote. The African, Asian and South American confederations are expected to support Mr. Blatter. The U.S. will not vote for him, even if that hurts its chances to host a World Cup.A vote is also scheduled on a proposal to suspend Israel from FIFA.• Rain, rain, go away.Texas, which has already recorded its wettest month ever, is expected to get more rain today and this weekend, but that’s not stopping residents from cleaning up.• Former House Speaker indicted.The news that Dennis Hastert, the Illinois politician and Republican speaker was indicted by a federal grand jury surprised many in Washington.Mr. Hastert, 73, is accused of lying to the F.B.I. and making bank withdrawals in a way that was designed to hide that he was paying $3.5 million to someone to conceal his undisclosed past “misconduct.”• Scrutiny of issue ads.Transit officials in Washington have voted to suspend all issue-oriented advertisements on the region’s rail and bus system.Officials were recently asked to consider an ad with a provocative cartoon of the Prophet Muhammad.• Exodus across the sea.Myanmar rejected today the U.N.’s assertions that the root cause of Southeast Asia’s migration crisis is the country’s treatment of the Rohingya, a persecuted Muslim minority.About 25,000 people have left Myanmar and Bangladesh on boats this year — double the number last year — and several hundred people are believed to have died at sea.• A tough to-do list.The president-elect of Nigeria, a former military ruler during the 1980s, is inaugurated today as leader of Africa’s biggest oil producer and most populous country.Despite all that oil, the economy has been crippled by a fuel crisis and widespread corruption. And a six-year insurgency by Boko Haram militants continues, but the U.S. signaled today that it was prepared to expand military cooperation in that fight.• Hillary Rodham Clinton’s new rival.Martin O’Malley, the former governor of Maryland and a onetime Clinton supporter, is expected to announce on Saturday in Baltimore his run for the Democratic presidential nomination.MARKETS• Revised Commerce Department data on gross domestic product showed a 0.7 percent decline in economic output in the first quarter of 2015.The data, released this morning, was a reversal of the initial 0.2 percent rise for the period reported last month.• Ross W. Ulbricht, the founder of the Silk Road website, the online bazaar often described as an eBay for drugs, will be given his prison sentence today in federal court in Manhattan. Prosecutors are seeking a life sentence.• Richard S. Fuld Jr., the former chief executive of Lehman Brothers, had a lot to say after nearly seven years of public silence.• Wall Street stocks  are falling. European shares finished broadly lower, and Asian indexes closed mixed.NOTEWORTHY• New on the silver screen.In “San Andreas,” opening at theaters today, the long-feared “Big One” hits California, and a rescue helicopter pilot is determined to save his wife in Los Angeles and their daughter in San Francisco.Two documentaries of note: “Hot Girls Wanted,” about the “amateur” pornography industry, and “The True Cost,” about the impact of fashion industry on people and the planet.• Book lovers, united.BookExpo America, the largest publishing event in the U.S., wraps up today in New York. Surprise news: The number of independent booksellers is growing.And more than 15,000 people are descending on New York for BookCon, the pop-culture version of BookExpo that takes place this weekend. Check out who’s attending.• Popular reads.“The Quartet,” Joseph J. Ellis’s look at the founders who turned America into one nation rather than a loose federation of states, is a new best seller.So is Jessica Knoll’s “Luckiest Girl Alive,” a fictional tale of a successful New York magazine writer whose life is shaken when secrets from her past are revealed.Get an early look at all of our rankings from the Sunday Book Review.• On top of the world.One World Observatory, at the top of 1 World Trade Center in New York, officially opens today.The windows in the tower offer far wider panoramas than those of the old trade center observatory. But the ride up brings with it painful memories.• Crunch time in hockey.The New York Rangers host the Tampa Bay Lightning (8 p.m. Eastern, NBCSN). On Saturday, the Chicago Blackhawks are at the Anaheim Ducks (8 p.m. Eastern, NBC).The winners face off in the Stanley Cup final; the losers go home.• Winners’ stories.“What Makes Us,” a series of documentary shorts on female athletes, debuts today on espnW.com with profiles of three soccer players: Sydney Leroux and Megan Rapinoe of the U.S., and Verónica Boquete of Spain.BACK STORYThere’s a tune that’s familiar to anyone who has ever had to sit through an American graduation ceremony.But the song and its history are thoroughly British.Edward Elgar wrote the music of the “Pomp and Circumstance” March No. 1 in 1901 in London.The title is from Act III of “Othello”: “Farewell the neighing steed, and the shrill trump,/ The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife,/ The royal banner, and all quality,/ Pride, pomp and circumstance of glorious war!”Lyrics — which do not contain “Go forth, new graduates!” or any variation of that — were added for the 1902 coronation of King Edward VII, and the piece became known as “Land of Hope and Glory.”So how did a patriotic British song become an anthem for American students?In 1905, Elgar came to Yale to receive an honorary doctorate of music.In his honor, the “Pomp and Circumstance” March No. 1 was played as the graduates and guests left the hall, and the audience loved it.Other colleges noticed and followed Yale’s lead. More than a century later, no graduation seems complete without it.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.Want to get the briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.