FRONT PAGEAn article on Monday about Pope Francis’ circumspection in avoiding pointed references to politics during his visit to Cuba referred incorrectly to José Daniel Ferrer, the head of the Patriotic Union of Cuba, the nation’s largest dissident organization, who said dissidents had hoped for a public meeting with the pope. He is Mr. Ferrer, not Mr. Daniel.INTERNATIONALAn article on Wednesday about a plea by two Hong Kong democracy activists for President Obama to take up their cause in his meetings with President Xi Jinping of China misidentified, in some editions, the charges filed against one of the activists, Joshua Wong, that arose from widespread protests in the territory last year. Mr. Wong was charged only with inciting and participating in an unlawful assembly — not contempt of court and obstruction of the police. (He was charged with contempt in April and with obstruction in July, in an unrelated incident.) The article also misstated, in some editions, the month that Mr. Wong was charged with incitement. It was last month, not September.•The Mexico City Journal article on Sept. 9, about tension between efforts to preserve the city’s historic architecture and the proliferation of modern high-rises built to meet the city’s needs, misidentified the source of a statement by the Mexican writer Carlos Fuentes, “Mexico City, like Rome, is a layered city where past civilizations coexist with one another in order to move forward.” Fuentes said it in an interview with Mother Jones in 1988; it is not a line from his novel “The Death of Artemio Cruz.”NATIONALBecause of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about a decision by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court to temporarily suspend the law license of the state’s attorney general, Kathleen G. Kane, misstated, in some copies, the number of Democratic state senators who would have to agree for her to be ousted under state law. It is several, not “more than a dozen.”SPORTSAn Associated Press report in the N.F.L. roundup on Wednesday about the Dallas Cowboys’ trade for quarterback Matt Cassel misidentified the team the Cowboys will play on Sunday. It is the Atlanta Falcons, not the Arizona Cardinals.•A picture caption in some editions on Sunday with the Sports of The Times column, about the Yankees and Mets playing each other with one eye on the baseball playoffs, misstated, in some copies, the inning in Saturday’s game in which Michael Pineda, the Yankees’ starting pitcher, was relieved. It was the sixth, not the seventh.•A report in some editions on Monday in the Sports Briefing column about the Devils’ 2-0 loss to the Boston Bruins in the N.H.L. preseason opener for both teams misstated the surname of the player who scored the Bruins’ two goals. He is Matt Irwin, not Irvin.THE ARTSBecause of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about a pledge of about $90 million by the Dutch government toward the purchase of two Rembrandt portraits it wants to secure for the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam referred incorrectly to the museum. While the collection there is mostly state-owned, the museum is managed independently; it is not state-run.OBITUARIESBecause of an editing error, an obituary on Sept. 16 about Fred DeLuca, a founder of the Subway sandwich chain, misspelled the surname of his sister at one point. As the obituary correctly noted elsewhere, she is Suzanne Greco, not Grecco.OPINIONAn Op-Ed article on Sept. 21 incorrectly characterized the legality of prescribing certain pain medication for use by children. Before the Food and Drug Administration approved the use of OxyContin by children ages 11 to 16 last month, physicians could use their discretion to prescribe the drug to that age group, for non-F. D. A.-approved use. It was not illegal.•An editorial on Sept. 23 about Republicans and Muslims incorrectly described an encounter between Senator John McCain and a woman at a town-hall meeting in 2008. When she said Barack Obama was an Arab, Mr. McCain shook his head and said, “No, Ma’am.” He did not let the claim go uncorrected.The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.