Three student leaders of last year’s pro-democracy Umbrella Movement in Hong Kong — including the rail-thin teenager who at 17 became the face of the protests — were charged on Thursday over their roles in events that set off the huge rallies and sit-ins.Joshua Wong, now 18, was charged with unlawful assembly and inciting others to take part in the assembly. If convicted, Mr. Wong, who co-founded a youth protest group called Scholarism, faces a maximum of five years in prison.Alex Chow, a former leader of the Hong Kong Federation of Students, was charged with unlawful assembly. Nathan Law, the federation’s current leader, was charged with incitement. Last September, they were among a group of students who boycotted classes to protest Beijing’s framework for electing Hong Kong’s next leader. That night, they broke into a fenced square in front of the Hong Kong government headquarters.That act escalated into clashes with the police as more people gathered in support of the students and of another group of protesters, Occupy Central With Love and Peace, that had joined forces with the two student organizations. The protests spread and prompted sit-ins that shut down three major arteries of Hong Kong for 79 days.The protesters objected to Beijing’s ruling on how the semiautonomous Chinese territory would be allowed to elect its chief executive beginning in 2017.China’s top legislative body, the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress, had agreed to a popular vote but required that all candidates be vetted by a nominating panel loyal to Beijing. The protesters said that made a mockery of the universal suffrage that Hong Kong had been promised.Mr. Wong, who formed Scholarism at 14 to oppose the introduction of a “patriotic education” program into Hong Kong’s schools, became a news media sensation during the protests, even scheduling a news conference to discuss his university entrance exam score.Despite the charges and the threat of imprisonment, Mr. Wong told reporters and supporters outside the Wan Chai Police Headquarters on Thursday that he did not regret the move to occupy the government square.It was, he said, “the best decision I have made in the four years I have been involved in the social movement and student movement.”Though the protesters, who used umbrellas to protect against pepper spray, did not force Beijing into making concessions, Mr. Chow vowed to continue the struggle.“I believe we will have another Umbrella Movement,” he said outside Police Headquarters. “What matters is that we better prepare ourselves for the next one.”Hong Kong, a prosperous former British colony, has long enjoyed civil liberties and independent institutions unknown in the rest of China under a “one country, two systems” arrangement. But many fear a fast-blurring line between the two systems and receding judicial independence, especially after China’s cabinet released a policy paper stating that Hong Kong judges must be patriotic.Derek Lam, a member of Scholarism who is expected to be charged on Friday with common assault in connection with breaking into the square, noted that charges had yet to be brought against police officers who were filmed beating an unarmed protester.“How can we say that the prosecution is not political?” Mr. Lam said. “This is a blatant attempt by the Hong Kong government to muffle political activists.”