WASHINGTON —  The House on Tuesday debated and voted on dozens of amendments to an important highway bill as Paul D. Ryan sought to use his first week as speaker to demonstrate his commitment to a more inclusive style of legislating.But the highway measure, which contains six years of major infrastructure projects but money for only three years, also loomed as a first test of Mr. Ryan’s ability to balance the political imperatives of his fellow Republicans against the hard realities of governing.Hard-line conservatives who pushed out the previous speaker, John A. Boehner, had demanded changes that would empower individual lawmakers, including a more freewheeling and open amendment process. Mr. Ryan, at his first news conference as speaker, said on Tuesday that the highway bill would represent a first step in that direction.“This week, you will see the highway bill is a good place to start,” Mr. Ryan said at the news conference, in the lobby of the Republican National Committee headquarters.“We’re opening up the process,” he continued. “We’re allowing members to participate in a way that the founders intended. And we’re advancing an issue that is a big priority to the hard-working taxpayers of this country, fixing our roads and our bridges, improving our transportation infrastructure.”With nearly 300 amendments filed on the highway bill, however, freewheeling could easily turn unwieldy.“It’s a balancing act,” said John Feehery, a former senior aide to House Republican leaders, including Speaker J. Dennis Hastert. “This is the hardest part of being speaker, knowing when to take over. And it’s not easy because the temptation is always to just make it happen if you are the speaker. And he has the power to do that, but you have to work through your committee process.”Still, the amendment process on the highway bill was not fully open. Rather than allowing any amendment to be brought to the floor, Republicans were using the usual Rules Committee procedures to approve groups of amendments to be debated and voted on.House Democrats said they did not expect any amendments that would change provisions on paying for the bill, including tax provisions on which Republicans and Democrats have their most serious disagreements.It was perhaps fitting that Mr. Ryan’s big legislative test was to preside over a debate that is actually less a fight about transportation infrastructure than a battle over tax policy, which has been his main area of interest in Congress.The problem is relatively simple: Virtually everyone agrees on the need to maintain the nation’s roads, but there is fierce disagreement over how to pay for it.The Highway Trust Fund, which pays for many federal transportation infrastructure programs, is financed largely by a tax on gasoline, currently set at 18.3 cents per gallon. The tax, however, was never indexed for inflation, and that, combined with the greater fuel economy of modern cars, has left the highway fund woefully short of cash — by more than $53 billion since 2008.Congress has made up the difference in recent years using general funds, but to make matters even tougher, existing law calls for the gas tax to be cut next year to 4.3 cents per gallon. Congress is almost certain to forestall the cut, as it has repeatedly in the past.Congressional analysts said that if the tax had been indexed for inflation in 1993, when it was last increased, it would now total about 30 cents per gallon.Mr. Ryan, who before becoming speaker was the chairman of the powerful tax-writing Ways and Means Committee, has long opposed any increase in the gas tax, a position shared by many Republicans.The stalemate over how to finance the trust fund led lawmakers to draw up a highway bill that includes six years of policy prescriptions — generally regarded as an optimum length of time for states to plan roadwork and other projects — but with enough money to cover only three years’ worth of the measure.That created an awkward situation in which Mr. Ryan and Representative Bill Shuster, Republican of Pennsylvania and chairman of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, contradicted each other on Tuesday.“This six-year bill creates more certainty for folks out there that are doing the work on our roads and infrastructure around the country,” Mr. Shuster saidBut when Mr. Ryan was pressed on the three years of financing, he said: “Well, it’s a three-year bill that has three years of financing. And if we can come up with more financing down the road, we can add more years to the bill.”Raising the gas tax would be the most straightforward approach, and many business groups support doing so, especially given the low price of gasoline. Yet Republicans oppose such a tax increase, especially because it would hit individual motorists who could take revenge at the ballot box.Some Democrats are also resistant because they view the tax on gasoline as having a disproportionate impact on lower-income Americans.One alternative would tax corporations earnings repatriated from overseas, but that proposal also has critics.Mr. Feehery, the former Republican leadership aide, who is now a lobbyist, said that Mr. Ryan was confronting the complicated politics of paying for transportation programs, and that the absence of a clear tax policy was not Mr. Ryan’s fault, even though he led the Ways and Means Committee, which has the authority to formulate a solution.“I don’t think you can blame it on Ryan; I think it was a leadership call on what he could and couldn’t do because of the politics behind it,” Mr. Feehery said. “And you also have to take a look at the Senate.”He added, “The view from the speaker’s chair is much different from the view from the Ways and Means Committee.”Mr. Shuster, the chairman of the transportation committee, said that some 280 amendments had already been filed, setting the stage for debate that could last three days or more. On Tuesday, 45 of those amendments were debated and voted on.Representative Louise M. Slaughter of New York, the senior Democrat on the Rules Committee, said that she, like the Republicans, was happy to have a more free-flowing debate. “That’s the way we operated when we first got here,” Ms. Slaughter said. “I have no objection whatsoever to watching democracy at work.”Noting that the Rules Committee was accustomed to working late, she added: “I brought an apple to work today. A New York apple.”