More than 20 years ago, a newly elected President Bill Clinton decided that overhauling the country’s loophole-ridden campaign fund-raising rules would be a top goal of his first year in office. Months later, faced with battles over health care and the deficit as well as opposition from lawmakers in his own party who had prospered under the old political-money regime, Mr. Clinton dropped the issue.Instead, he became an adept fund-raiser and aggressive envelope-pusher, exploiting regulatory loopholes to raise hundreds of millions of dollars in so-called soft money for the Democratic Party, and eventually ensnaring himself in one of the most significant scandals of his presidency.Now it is his wife’s turn to tackle the issue of big money in politics.In Iowa this week, in the first public appearances of her second bid for president, Hillary Rodham Clinton said that one of her top priorities was to “fix our dysfunctional political system and get unaccountable money out of it once and for all, even if it takes a constitutional amendment.”Her remarks came at a time when once again, lightly regulated money is flooding the political system, this time moving not through national parties but party-blessed “super PACs“ that — thanks to Citizens United and other court and regulatory decisions — can accept unlimited corporate, union and individual contributions.Once again, a Clinton is poised to benefit: Democrats expect the super PACs backing Mrs. Clinton to raise as much as $300 million, on top of the $1 billion or more she is likely to raise for her campaign and the Democratic National Committee. And once again a Clinton has pledged to be the agent of change.Mrs. Clinton’s decision to address the issue so early in her campaign may reflect, in part, the pressure she feels from a new cohort of activists who are urging her to address not just inequality of wealth, but also the inequality of political power it is intertwined with. Not since Watergate, those activists argue, have individual donors commanded the power and influence they do today.Even some Republican candidates and contenders have called for addressing the impact of Citizens United, or have proposed limits on some kinds of campaign contributions. Some reformers argue that voters are so disgusted with Washington that Mrs. Clinton must present them with a plan to fix corruption before they will embrace any further vision she may have for a more activist government.“That one of Clinton’s first policy proposals in her campaign is to address our broken campaign finance system speaks volumes about the role money in politics will play in the 2016 campaign,” said David Donnelly, president of Every Voice, a group favoring tighter rules for political money.Some of the biggest big-money opponents are themselves big donors. Mrs. Clinton’s announcement in Iowa came just a day after the Democracy Alliance, a leading club of left-leaning donors, announced that curbing organized money in politics would be one of its top funding priorities for the next five years.Mrs. Clinton was represented at the alliance’s meeting in San Francisco by John D. Podesta, a senior adviser to her new campaign, and by Buffy Wicks, who runs a super PAC now devoted to electing her president.The incongruity — or perhaps hypocrisy — is not lost on longtime supporters of tighter regulation, who are looking for more details from Mrs. Clinton on what she has in mind, but would far rather have her in their corner than not.And it is familiar territory for Mrs. Clinton. As a senator from New York, she voted for the legislation sponsored by Senators John McCain of Arizona and Russ Feingold of Wisconsin that shut down the soft-money system that fueled her husband’s political career. She co-sponsored legislation to provide public financing for Senate candidates after raising $30 million for her successful campaign.But while Mrs. Clinton criticizes “unaccountable money” in politics, her family foundation has raised tens of millions of dollars outside the campaign system from foreign governments and corporations seeking access and influence in Washington. Her campaign’s new chief counsel was also the co-author of a congressional deal last year that will allow wealthy donors to begin giving more than $1 million every election cycle to each party’s national committees.Jesse Ferguson, a campaign spokesman, said Mrs. Clinton “believes our political system is stacked against everyday Americans” and will make “changing our campaign finance system one of her top priorities.”Still, Lawrence Lessig, a political theorist at Harvard and founder of a super PAC that has tried — but so far mostly failed — to turn dismay over Citizens United into a winning political issue, said he welcomed Mrs. Clinton’s help. “There is no hypocrisy in saying you can run a campaign according to the rules of the road while also saying that you want to change the system,” he said.Mrs. Clinton’s signal in Iowa, Mr. Lessig said, “reflects the increasing awareness everyone has that unless we address this issue, we can’t address any other issues.”Embracing the outrage over campaign money also knocks away one more argument for a challenger to run against Mrs. Clinton on the left. Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, who many liberals hope will challenge her in the primaries, has been among the Democratic Party’s fiercest critics of Citizens United and the Supreme Court’s subsequent decisions deregulating campaign fund-raising.It is a lesson Mrs. Clinton first learned when she ran unsuccessfully against President Obama in 2008. In 2007, Mr. Obama outlined plans for tougher disclosure and tighter campaign regulation and then pounded Mrs. Clinton relentlessly over her own stands. (It did not help Mrs. Clinton when she chose an audience of grass-roots liberal organizers to mount an ill-timed, if well-reasoned, defense of the lobbying profession.)For some who hope Mrs. Clinton becomes an ally in limiting the influence of donors in politics, Mr. Obama holds another lesson: Don’t trust your friends.As a candidate back then, Mr. Obama called himself “an advocate for public financing of campaigns” and pledged to take part in the post-Watergate federal financing system, which offered candidates a dollop of taxpayer cash in the general election in exchange for a pledge not to raise and spend other money.But after he won the nomination, Mr. Obama reneged, withdrawing from the system and helping to usher in the era of the billion-dollar presidential bid. He promised to pursue a newer, more robust public financing system, but never did.“History tells us we have never had a president who has aggressively pushed for reforming the campaign finance system,” said Fred Wertheimer, a longtime advocate of tighter campaign finance rules and president of Democracy 21.