WASHINGTON —  After years of dysfunction and abysmal public approval ratings, a chastened, even beaten-down Congress on Friday passed a $1.8 trillion package of spending and tax cuts with remarkably little rancor.The sweeping deal was the product of a convergence of forces: Speaker Paul D. Ryan’s deftness in pacifying rebellious conservatives, the recognition by Republicans that a government shutdown could cripple them in the races for the White House and Senate and a recovering economy that helped end an era of austerity.The relatively swift passage of the prodigious year-end package — by wide margins in the House and in the Senate — in many respects showed lawmakers bowing to the hard realities of a divided government.President Obama quickly signed the measure, praised Mr. Ryan for his work and acknowledged the sacrifice of his predecessor as speaker, John A. Boehner, for also making the accord possible.“I mean, we’ve gotten kind of used to last-minute crises and shutdown threats, and so forth,” Mr. Obama said at a news conference. “And this is a messy process that doesn’t satisfy everybody completely, but it’s more typical of American democracy. And I think that Speaker Ryan deserves a role in that.”The agreement also showed just how easily a fractious legislature can seem functional again when there is agreement to spend more money, adding at least $2 trillion in debt over the next 20 years, according to the Committee for a Responsible Budget, a nonpartisan group.For Republican leaders in Congress, there was particular motivation to show that they were capable of governing.As soon as the Senate adopted the year-end measure, the majority leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, declared, “By any objective standard, I think, the Senate is back to work.”Mr. McConnell also took credit for ending the threats of a government shutdown or default on the debt that some Republicans, particularly House conservatives, had embraced as a way to pressure the Obama administration. Democrats, however, were not readily willing to give credit.While Mr. Ryan succeeded in winning a majority of Republican votes for the huge spending and tax-break package, adding to his string of successes in recent weeks, the House Democratic leader, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, insisted that Republicans came on board only because of a recently added provision to end a 40-year ban on crude oil exports.“They wanted big oil so much that they give away the store,” Ms. Pelosi said in an interview, adding: “I feel almost jubilant about what is in this appropriations bill.”After a period of belt-tightening in Washington — including automatic budget cuts imposed in 2013 — the spending measure for 2016 provides a notable $66 billion increase in federal outlays above previously agreed-upon limits, divided equally between military and nonmilitary programs.It also represents a return to a more traditional appropriations process, with lawmakers directing money to an array of their priorities, including a $1.4 billion increase for military construction projects and $2 billion increase for the National Institutes of Health, as well as an array of individual items that some lawmakers were still discovering buried in the 2,009-page spending bill.In keeping with a bipartisan compromise, hashed out in an era of divided government and deep-rooted philosophical differences, all sides claimed victory.The White House and congressional Democrats said they had thwarted the Republicans’ main policy goals, including efforts to cut off government financing for Planned Parenthood and put restrictions on Syrian and Iraqi refugees, while securing a number of their own priorities, including tax benefits for working Americans and to promote renewable energy.In concrete, and personal terms, the approval of the legislation capped several weeks of early successes for Mr. Ryan, perhaps the most notable being how he has calmed the restive caucus that ousted Mr. Boehner as the House speaker. After ushering through major highway and education bills that had lingered on the congressional agenda for months, Mr. Ryan, who is the former chairman of the tax-writing Ways and Means Committee, pushed through the major tax-break package that many Democrats opposed.“We passed more major legislation in a few weeks than we have in a few years,” Mr. Ryan said moments after the vote.In the House, which approved the tax breaks on Thursday, the vote Friday morning on the spending measure was 316 to 113, with 150 Republicans and 166 Democrats supporting the bill.The Senate followed with uncharacteristic alacrity. In expedited floor action, on the edge of the holiday recess, the Senate voted to end debate on the overall legislation, dispensed with several procedural steps, and approved the package. The vote was 65 to 33.The spending measure includes some major policy provisions, including the reauthorization and expansion of benefits from emergency workers suffering from health problems related to their work responding to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in New York.In response to concern raised partly by recent terrorist attacks, the spending measure requires more vigorous security checks as part of the visa-waiver program, used by millions of visitors to enter the United States under an expedited process. The package also incorporates legislation that expands the sharing of information between private firms and federal security agencies to prevent cyberattacks.Still, some Democrats warned that the tax package would have long-term consequences.“This bill is even referred to as a Christmas tree bill because special interests get special presents, all in ornaments on this tree,” Representative Lloyd Doggett, Democrat of Texas, said in a speech on the House floor on Thursday.Representative Tom Cole, Republican of Oklahoma and a member of the Appropriations Committee, managed much of the floor debate for Republicans and said that all lawmakers could find items to support or oppose in such a huge spending and tax-break package.“There is much to be proud of in this 2,000-page bill and accompanying explanatory statement,” Mr. Cole said.In the Senate, leaders in each party expressed support for the deal.“This legislation helps our economy, helps our national security, and strikes more blows to a partisan health law that hurts the middle class,” Mr. McConnell said in a speech on the Senate floor.At a news conference later, Mr. McConnell noted that immediately after winning the majority last November, he had promised there would be no shutdown or default. “I wanted to end those kinds of rattling experiences that the American people don’t like,” he said, “and never produces a positive result anyway.”Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, who is also seeking the Republican nomination for president, had threatened in an interview on Fox News on Thursday to delay passage of the package.But shortly after his remarks, Mr. McConnell went to the floor and secured an agreement for a fast-track series of votes on Friday morning — a process that Mr. Rubio could have blocked but did not, much to the relief of his Senate colleagues eager to begin their holiday recess.