BUJUMBURA, Burundi —  After months of unrest and a night of explosions and gunfire, Burundians went to the polls on Tuesday in a presidential election whose results are not in doubt but whose consequences could prove deeply destabilizing.President Pierre Nkurunziza is seeking a third term in office in defiance of international condemnation and opposition at home. Every major opposition party in this impoverished African nation has boycotted the election.At several polling places around Bujumbura, the capital, turnout was low on Tuesday, with voters often outnumbered by campaign workers and the police. Many people who chose not to vote expressed deep skepticism about a process they deemed little more than political theater.Several explosions rocked the city overnight, and sporadic shooting could be heard just hours before the polls opened. At least two police officers and one civilian were killed, according to the government.Nighttime violence has become common since Burundi’s current crisis began in April. Soon after Mr. Nkurunziza announced his bid for a third term, people took to the streets to express outrage over what they saw as a clear violation of the Constitution.Scores were killed as demonstrators clashed with the police.On Tuesday morning, large crowds gathered in several Bujumbura neighborhoods hostile to the president, tearing up cobblestone streets, knocking down signs and setting tires ablaze to create roadblocks.In the Nyakabiga neighborhood, the site of many protests in the spring, residents awoke to find the body of a known opposition supporter in a ditch.“Last night, there were many, many explosions and shootings,” said Jack Bakahemana, 33. “We awoke to find this man. He was not from this neighborhood, but we know he was a member of the opposition. They catch him and beat him.”Mr. Bakahemana said he would not vote. “We cannot vote because Nkurunziza is a killer,” he said. “How can we vote for a killer?”In areas where the governing party has support, there was a very different view of the election.“I thank God I can vote for a great man like the president,” said Benjamin Burikukiye, 20.Mr. Burikukiye said he believed Mr. Nkurunziza could keep the peace and secure a bright future for the country.“What the opposition say is rubbish,” he said.Many other people were afraid to be seen as taking sides. Outside a polling place in Cibitoke, another neighborhood where there have been protests, Ndizeye Leonidas, 30, rubbed his ink-stained finger in the dirt. “I do not want others to know I voted,” he said.Looking around, seeing few other people casting ballots, he was not optimistic. “I am afraid there is going to be a civil war,” he said, before tucking his hand into his pocket and walking off.In May, a general and former head of Burundi’s intelligence service tried to oust the president while he was out of the country, but the effort failed. The coup leaders went into hiding, but they have continued to threaten to lead a revolt.With fear and uncertainty gripping the country, more than 170,000 civilians have fled since April. Often traveling at night, with few possessions beyond what they can carry on their backs, they make their way to the borders of Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Tanzania.As many as 1,000 people are entering Tanzania from Burundi each day, according to Doctors Without Borders, which says resources are now stretched to their breaking point.“In the last two weeks, the number of people streaming across the border from Burundi has almost tripled,” the group said in a statement. “We can only expect that number to increase.”Western diplomats said last-ditch efforts to find compromise between the opposition and the governing party had failed.The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, called on the authorities “to do all in their power to ensure security and a peaceful atmosphere during the election” and “to refrain from any acts of violence that could compromise the stability of Burundi and the region.”John Kirby, a spokesman for the State Department, said the elections “lack credibility” and risked creating greater instability.At a tense meeting on Monday with Western officials, officials close to Mr. Nkurunziza made it clear that they planned to change the Constitution to solidify control over the country, according to a person who had been briefed on the negotiations.The government also refused a request to reopen an independent radio station, the person said.Last month, after parliamentary elections that independent observers condemned as unfair and flawed, Mr. Nkurunziza’s party, the National Council for the Defense of Democracy-Forces for the Defense of Democracy, won a sweeping victory.Since then, the party has sought to strengthen its grip on power and its control over the intelligence and security apparatus.While there are large pockets of opposition to Mr. Nkurunziza in the capital, he has deep support in other parts of the country. The central theme of his appeal to the people has been simple: During his presidency, there has been no war.“For the first time, we have had 10 years without bloodshed since independence,” Mr. Nkurunziza told hundreds of supporters on Friday at a campaign rally.Burundi gained its independence from Belgium in 1962 and has been plagued by war and conflict ever since, often with the two major ethnic groups, Hutu and Tutsi, pitted against each other.About 300,000 people died in a decade-long civil war that started in 1993 and only ended after years of often-difficult negotiations.The gains made in rebuilding this nation since the end of fighting are now at risk, analysts say.“Many people are afraid,” said Sarah Jackson, Amnesty International’s deputy regional director for East Africa, the Horn and the Great Lakes.“The Burundian authorities have crushed demonstrations with lethal and excessive force,” she said. “They continue to arrest and torture protesters and opposition members. People are wondering what the future holds.”The polls closed early Tuesday evening. The ballots were boxed up, and the counting began as residents hurried to get home before dark.The government is expected to announce the results this week.