MONTGOMERY, Ala. —  The pockmarks and scratches are still visible in the rotunda floor of the Alabama Judicial System building — the permanent scars of Chief Justice Roy S. Moore’s last epic battle over God and the proper role of the federal government.It was there that Chief Justice Moore, a devout Baptist, had erected a 5,000-pound granite monument listing the Ten Commandments. The federal courts ordered it removed, and in 2003, it was carted away by workers who scuffed the floor. Chief Justice Moore was eventually removed from office by a state ethics panel after defying a federal court’s order that he have the monument removed.The statue has not returned, but Chief Justice Moore, who was re-elected in 2012, has, and is once again the center of national attention after ordering Alabama’s probate judges not to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, despite a federal judge’s indication that she expects them to do so.Chief Justice Moore’s order, issued late Sunday, threw the Alabama court system into disarray. On Monday morning in the big cities of Montgomery and Birmingham, same-sex couples walked ecstatically out of county courthouses with marriage licenses in hand. But judges in most other counties declined to issue licenses. In one case, lawyers representing gay-rights groups fought back, unsuccessfully, when a federal judge denied their request to hold the probate judge in Mobile County in contempt for closing the entire marriage license division.Behind his heavy wooden desk in the judicial building Monday morning, Chief Justice Moore, a confident, 67-year-old West Point graduate and Vietnam veteran, was unapologetic and firm in his position that the federal judiciary has seriously overreached in its effort to impose same-sex marriage in Alabama — a state where 81 percent of voters passed a constitutional amendment prohibiting same-sex marriage in 2006.“If we accept this without contest, without standing up for what’s pure and simple constitutional law, then we, too, bow down to unlawful authority,” he said. “And that’s not the role of government leaders in the state.”The matter seems custom-made for Chief Justice Moore, who had already earned hero status among many conservatives for his Ten Commandments stand, his argument that America is a fundamentally Christian nation and his concerns about overreach by the federal judiciary.Now, yet again, cultural conservatives were praising him, liberals were condemning him, and Chief Justice Moore, standing on principle, seemed unfazed about whether he would end up on the winning side.“It’s about time someone stood up for the voters of Alabama,” said Brian Brown, president of the National Organization for Marriage, in a phone interview Monday.“This is a pathetic, last-ditch attempt at judicial fiat,” said Sarah Warbelow, the legal director at the Human Rights Campaign, in a statement late Sunday.A few blocks away from the State Supreme Court on Monday morning, Tori Sisson and Shanté Wolfe were preparing to step into the Montgomery County courthouse and receive their marriage license. The couple seemed too happy to be angry with Chief Justice Moore.“Bless his heart,” Ms. Sisson said, a pronouncement that, in this part of the world, tends to transmit a mix of pity, compassion and gentle judgment. (Ms. Sisson is an Alabama-based staff member with the Human Rights Campaign).Chief Justice Moore has long fretted that the United States is “being led to deny the existence of the Creator God,” as he put it in his 2005 autobiography, “So Help Me God.”In the book, Chief Justice Moore recalls the day that he received Christ in a tiny Baptist church in Gallant, Ala., his hometown. In Vietnam, he wrote, he was shocked at the lack of discipline and drug use among the troops, and said he had received “several threats” from troops when he tried to stop their drug use. He restored some camaraderie, he said, by building a boxing ring — and entering it, himself.He won all of his fights, he said.By 1995, he was serving as a circuit judge in Etowah County, where he began his long history of tussling with civil liberties groups over placing Ten Commandments plaques in court settings. The story ended in November 2003, when a special ethics panel removed him from the chief justice post after he refused to remove the statue.“I have absolutely no regrets,” he said after the ruling. He ran for governor twice, and failed, but in 2012, he shocked the political establishment with his re-election to the state’s high court, cashing in on name recognition and Alabama’s widespread Christian sentiment and skeptical stance toward federal government power.“If you look at the professional class in Alabama, most of them would say they’d wish he’d just quit this foolishness and let Alabama move along with the rest of the country,” said Glen Browder, professor emeritus in American democracy at Jacksonville State University and a former Democratic congressman from Alabama. “But he’s popular in the church crowd.”Chief Justice Moore’s office is decorated with a wooden plaque of the commandments, along with a portrait of George Washington and a photograph of Jefferson Davis, the president of the Confederacy. (Chief Justice Moore said that he has never been a segregationist, but that has no qualms about making arguments in favor of states’ rights when they are warranted.)In advance of a lengthy conversation that turned mostly on his legal position on the same-sex marriage issue, he gave a visitor a copy of a pocket-size book, “One Nation Under God,” which included the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and other documents.Chief Justice Moore laid out a number of reasons that he believed Alabama’s probate judges should not be subject to the orders of Judge Callie V. S. Granade, issued in January in Federal District Court, that deemed the state’s prohibition on same-sex marriage unconstitutional.One is the principle, as he put it in a letter to the probate judges, “that state courts are not bound by the judicial opinions of federal district or appeals courts on questions of federal constitutional law.”Chief Justice Moore said these matters had nothing to do with his personal beliefs about the wisdom of allowing same-sex couples to marry. But he shared those beliefs, too.“Now we see the federal courts moving to take away institutions ordained of God, and recognized by the people for hundreds and even thousands of years before this country came into being,” he said. The definition of marriage, he said, should not be left to federal judges.“Courts are just people,” he said. “They’re just men and women dressed in black robes who have no power to re-declare, or declare, the social foundation of this nation as being unconstitutional.”