Each week in Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books. This week, Pankaj Mishra and Alice Gregory discuss the fate of the public intellectual in an age of specialization.By Pankaj MishraThere were doubts about the public intellectual even during the Enlightenment.In 1969, after a demoralizing evening with some proto-neocons, Alfred Kazin wrote in his journal, “They are all such specialists, such knowers on a limited scale.” Kazin, loyal to an older ideal of the public intellectual as outsider, was appalled when writers and critics turned into a service class for politicians and businessmen. Intellectual life has degraded further under the auspices of specialization since the 1960s.The public intellectual, incarnated as access journalist, policy wonk and, after 9/11, laptop warrior for liberalism and democracy, has finally, absurdly, become an “expert” on terrorism. The alienated critic of society — exemplified once by such proud upholders of the individual conscience as Leo Tolstoy, Simone Weil, Hannah Arendt and Andrei Sakharov — has ended up whispering advice and encouragement to power.A lot of blame must be placed on the quasi-religious belief in continuous progress, and the craving, which secular intellectuals possess as much as pious folk, to be subsumed into a larger force and movement — in this case, the onward march of history. Kazin’s ambitious peers wanted to be seen with their polemical op-eds as contributing to revolutionary changes across the world. Kazin, however, knew their lust for power (and fame, sex and money); he could see how intellectuals as accomplices of political elites were prone to confuse their private interest with public interest.There were doubts about the public intellectual even during the Enlightenment, when this figure emerged as the designer of rational society and the nemesis of religious prejudice and superstition. Many well-placed and influential men in the 18th century were convinced that reason and truth could triumph universally through the transformation of public opinion (itself a new idea). Such secular priests could eagerly ally themselves with the power du jour in order to expedite the re-engineering of hearts and minds. Thus, Voltaire commended the decision by Russia’s empress, Catherine II, to militarily intervene in Poland, and “preach tolerance with bayonets at the ends of their rifles.”But, as Rousseau once suggested in his critique of Voltaire’s portrait of Prophet Muhammad, those attacking religious fanaticism were often infected by its secular variant. Though deeply critical of religious authority, Rousseau believed that an assault on religion from the ramparts of literary-intellectual salons was futile. In his view, the Enlightenment philosophers were shiftily conservative, careful not to challenge unjust social and economic institutions even as they ostentatiously positioned themselves against religious tyranny.Rousseau’s own alternative to self-seeking public intellectualism was a broader assault on inequality, and the creation of an egalitarian social order. But, fetishizing his status as an outsider against rich, smooth-talking cosmopolitans, Rousseau did not escape the self-deceptions of moralism. It is no accident that the man who first tried to put Rousseau’s ideas into action was a fanatic: Robespierre. The history of modern demagogy shows that the misfit from the provinces, claiming to represent the common man, can unleash mayhem in the name of superior virtue.As for the cosmopolitan exponent of reason, while claiming universal relevance he has been repeatedly exposed surfing some parochial prejudice or other: of nation, ethnicity, class or race. Public intellectuals with sectarian loyalties have assumed a variety of cheerleading positions in the ideological movements that have made our times so extraordinarily violent. Their pseudo-­rational schemata for progress have helped entrench specialists, technocrats and other day-trippers to the life of the mind.Meanwhile, history has come full circle instead of marching forward. The most convincing and influential public intellectual today — Pope Francis — is not an agent of reason and progress, let alone a “specialist.” In a piquant irony, he is the moral voice of the church that was the Enlightenment’s main adversary.Pankaj Mishra is the author of several books, including “The Romantics: A Novel,” which won the Los Angeles Times Art Seidenbaum Award for First Fiction, and “From the Ruins of Empire,” a finalist for the Orwell and Lionel Gelber Prizes in 2013. He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature and contributes essays on politics and literature to The New York Review of Books, The New Yorker, The Guardian of London and The London Review of Books.◆ ◆ ◆By Alice GregoryIt’s not self-evident that one’s stances on, say, abortion and what counts as a good movie should align, but they often do.A public intellectual is someone whose opinions help to set the moral and aesthetic standards of her time; she draws fault lines, explains the stakes of present-day conflicts, interrogates collective intuitions. But more specifically — and more strangely — a public intellectual is someone who articulates alliances between seemingly disparate cultural and political opinions. It’s not self-evident that one’s stances on, say, abortion and what counts as a good movie should align, but they do, remarkably, again and again. To believe in enough of these correlations, and to convince others that you are right, is the role of the public intellectual. It is to possess Susan Sontag’s definition of intelligence as “a kind of taste: taste in ideas.”The past appears overcrowded with public intellectuals, while in the present they seem scarce. Perhaps this was always true, but I struggle to quickly name more than a few: Ta-Nehisi Coates, Elon Musk, Tavi Gevinson? It’s incredible that the first three that come to my mind are people who, until quite recently, would have typically been excluded from the classification — a black man, a space-­obsessed eccentric, a 19-year-old girl. But that said, they feel like relics: Their influence is old-fashioned in how it works. Intellectual influence in today’s world is different than it once was.If everyone was once a critic, now everyone is a comedian. Social media, the irritatingly all-purpose diagnosis for any and all contemporary quandaries, best explains how this has become true. Kidding around — in tweets and Instagram captions and Facebook threads — is our default mode of serious expression. Jokes told in service of signaling a worldview are our primary mode of commentary, and it makes sense that we now take our cues most readily from those who are best at it: Stephen Colbert, Jon Stewart, Sarah Silverman, Chris Rock, Amy Schumer, Louis C.K., Hannibal Buress, Aziz Ansari. Comedy is the most immediate and swiftly exchanged currency online, and it’s unsurprising that the people who use it to advance ideas are the ones with the most viral opinions. A joke seems uncalculated in its morality; to hear a good one is to feel as though you’re being told the truth. It’s hard to imagine someone who is consistently funny not meaning what she says. And meaning what one says, openly, again and again, counts for more than we typically think it does.It’s the nature of an age to be more eschatological than any that ever came before, and ours, like its antecedents but more so, is infused with a sense of doom. Who doesn’t assume our children will live in a world worse than ours? Who can even ethically defend having children? And yet a reasonable person neither ignores this dark future nor allows it to fully consume her mind.Good comedians aren’t furnishing their audiences with an escape hatch, nor are they offering it up as mere amusement. Humor gives them both permission and incentive to examine the world for its flaws, as well as a medium for reporting them back to us.Jokes bring pleasure that is intoxicating in a way that an argument almost never is. A joke forces you to agree with it, or at least reckon with its truth by acknowledging that it made you smile. Laughter is pre-analyzed agreement.Alice Gregory is a writer living in New York. Her work has appeared in publications including The New Yorker, Harper’s, GQ, The Wall Street Journal and The Boston Globe. She is a contributing editor at T: The New York Times Style Magazine. Her essay “Mavericks,” which ran in n+1, was included in the 2014 edition of The Best American Sportswriting.