MIAMI —  Senator Marco Rubio, the 43-year-old son of Cuban immigrants, on Monday declared that it was time for his generation to lead the country, portraying himself as the youthful future of a Republican Party that has struggled to connect with an increasingly diverse electorate.Formally declaring his candidacy for president, Mr. Rubio entered a contest so far dominated by two aging American political dynasties — the Bushes and the Clintons — and warned Republicans and Democrats alike that it was time to start fresh.“The time has come for our generation to lead the way towards a new American century,” he said.“Before us now is the opportunity to author the greatest chapter yet in the amazing story of America,” Mr. Rubio told hundreds of supporters who crowded the lobby of the Freedom Tower, a historic building where many Cuban émigrés were processed on their arrival in the United States. “But we can’t do that by going back to the leaders and ideas of the past.”He said of Hillary Rodham Clinton, who entered the campaign a day earlier: “Just yesterday, a leader from yesterday began a campaign for president by promising to take us back to yesterday. Yesterday is over, and we are never going back.”And in highlighting his family’s immigration story, Mr. Rubio drew an implicit contrast with Jeb Bush, the former Florida governor. “In many countries, the highest office in the land is reserved for the rich and powerful,” he said. “But I live in an exceptional country where even the son of a bartender and a maid can have the same dreams and the same future as those who come from power and privilege.”Mr. Rubio’s campaign is predicated on the belief that he can bring together broad segments of his party around an optimistic message of upward mobility and economic solutions geared to the 21st century.He framed the campaign as “a generational choice about what kind of country we will be.”For a Republican Party that skews older and whiter, and which is still struggling to attract minorities and young voters, Mr. Rubio — a Spanish speaker known for his rhetorical skills — offers an appealingly youthful face on which to base its hopes.But six and a half years after Barack Obama was swept into the White House on a similar call for generational renewal, the challenge facing Mr. Rubio is whether voters are looking for another charismatic first-term senator with a compelling personal story who promises to be a transformative figure.And while Mr. Rubio has been a sometimes fierce critic of the president, comparisons with Mr. Obama will be inevitable.“If you just look at it from 20,000 feet, you have another young senator who is relatively new, who has a slightly unusual name and comes from a recent immigrant background, and the question is whether people say, “We’ve seen this movie before,’ ” said David Axelrod, a former top adviser to Mr. Obama who helped shape his image.Mr. Rubio offered a hint of his complicated relationship with Mr. Obama — and perhaps of how he might identify with him — when he explained in his memoir how touched he was watching the president-elect’s victory speech in 2008. “I was so proud to be an American, and so moved by the powerful symbolism of the moment, I couldn’t stop myself from tearing up,” Mr. Rubio wrote.But Mr. Axelrod is a believer, as are many Republicans, in the school of presidential politics, which holds that voters look for someone offering a remedy for the problems they see facing the country, rather than a replica of the president they have. And recent history suggests that voters favor candidates who are a stylistic, and at times substantive, departure from the incumbent.Mr. Rubio’s aides highlight his policy expertise, particularly on foreign affairs, hoping to avoid the criticism that Republicans regularly made of Mr. Obama: that he did not have the experience to be president.“If you read Marco’s policy speeches and papers, he’s a very serious student of what’s going and what needs to be done and looking to the future, much more so than Obama was,” said Charlie Black, a Republican strategist who is not committed to a candidate. “Obama was all rhetoric.”In his speech, Mr. Rubio called on the Obama administration to abandon its “dangerous concessions to Iran, and its hostility to Israel,” to no longer be passive, as he put it, “in the face of Chinese and Russian aggression,” and to end “the near total disregard for the erosion of democracy and human rights around the world, especially Cuba, Venezuela and Nicaragua.”As if to underscore his engagement on international issues, Mr. Rubio will forgo the customary post-announcement campaign swing to fly back to Washington to attend a meeting of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on legislation that would allow Congress to approve any nuclear deal reached with Iran.Mr. Rubio’s backers also note that, unlike President Obama, their candidate already has the equivalent of executive experience, by virtue of having served as the speaker of the Florida House of Representatives.What they are less likely to trumpet to Republican primary voters is that Mr. Rubio has also been much more willing to take risks as a senator than Mr. Obama was during his short time as a lawmaker, helping to write an immigration overhaul bill, for example, that is bitterly disliked by vocal elements of the party.Indeed, despite delivering his announcement in a building that is a symbol of immigration for refugees fleeing Cuba, and extolling the virtues of his hard-working immigrant parents — who came to the United States in the mid-1950s, before Fidel Castro came to power — Mr. Rubio made no mention of that immigration bill and only mentioned the issue in passing. He listed “modernizing our immigration laws” among several ways to help ”create millions of better-paying modern jobs.”Karl Rove, the longtime Republican strategist, called Mr. Rubio’s role in the immigration fight, and his push for a pathway to citizenship for immigrants in the country illegally, generally positive for him. “It shows he’s not afraid of taking controversial stands if he thinks it moves conservatism forward and he can get a seat at the table to shape the bill,” Mr. Rove said.But the legislation also highlights the challenges Mr. Rubio will face as he tries to appeal to a range of voters. The immigration plan enraged conservatives and ultimately died in the Republican-controlled House.Mr. Rubio has since distanced himself from his own bill, saying he now understands that any overhaul must come through a step-by-step process and start with border security.That has not entirely mollified conservative hard-liners, and it has diminished enthusiasm for him among Republicans who feel the party must embrace an overhaul of immigration policies.One of those Republicans, Senator John McCain of Arizona, approached Mr. Rubio on the Senate floor last month and reminded him that he still had the option to run for re-election next year, according to a Republican familiar with the conversation.But to Mr. Rubio’s thinking, and that of other Republicans, there is little political upside to spending more years engaged in the votes, trade-offs and compromises native to the Senate.The risks inherent in compiling such a record, after all, are partly why so many senators encouraged Mr. Obama to leave the Senate and run for president at the first opportunity.“I have heard some suggest that I should step aside and wait my turn,” Mr. Rubio said Monday, as the crowd — a mix of Spanish and English speakers — cried, “No!”“But I cannot,” he continued. “Because I believe our very identity as an exceptional nation is at stake, and I can make a difference as president.”Mr. Rubio’s backers believe that this is his moment, that he has the right mix of political pragmatism, conservative credibility and rhetorical skills — buttressed by firm policy specifics — to appeal to Republican primary voters hungry to both retake the White House and do so without retreating from principle.But his broad appeal could also leave him with no obvious core of support.“What’s interesting about him is that he seems to be everybody’s second choice, and that means that he has the potential to appeal to everyone, but no guarantees,” said Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster.Mr. Rubio seemed determined to suffuse the opening moments of his campaign with symbols of his youth. Rap from the artists Flo Rida and Will Smith (“Welcome to Miami”) blared from loudspeakers. Large screens showed Mr. Rubio coaching his young son’s football team. And his logo announced his name in the lowercase, informal script of a casual email.There were many young people on hand, including several former students of Mr. Rubio’s at Florida International University, but also plenty of retirees. Among them was Dennis Hahm, 70, from Naples, on the state’s west coast, who had made the two-hour drive for the occasion.“I voted for Jeb,” Mr. Hahm said. “But Jeb is way too much of Washington. I voted for all of the Bushes. You might say I’m Bushed out.”He added, “It’s time for the young lions to come on.”