Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Data breach exposes millions.The F.B.I. is investigating how computer hackers, apparently from China, gained access to the records of up to four million U.S. government workers.The news comes amid disclosures that the Obama administration has expanded the warrantless monitoring of Americans’ international Internet traffic to search for evidence of malicious hacking.China today called the allegations “irresponsible.”• It’s jobs day.Employers added 280,000 jobs in May, the Labor Department reported today.Although the unemployment rate rose to 5.5 percent, the job creation numbers lower worries about the U.S. economy’s momentum after a stretch of lackluster growth.• A victory for environmentalists.Norway’s Parliament voted to drop investments in coal-focused companies from its $890 billion sovereign wealth fund because of their impact on climate change.The vote was part of a growing movement to divest out of fossil fuels.• Support for undocumented immigrants.Nearly three-quarters of Americans say they support a path to legal status for undocumented immigrants, according to a new opinion poll by the Pew Research Center.About 11 million immigrants, mostly from Latin America, live in the U.S. illegally, and their status is becoming a major issue in the 2016 presidential race.• Group of 7 to gather.Seven world leaders meet this weekend in Germany to discuss maintaining and extending pressure on Russia over Ukraine, where new violence has erupted.• Weekend voting.Turkey’s president, once seen as a model for integrating Islam, democracy and economics, could be on the verge of concentrating more power in his office, depending on the results of Sunday’s parliamentary elections.And Mexicans will vote Sunday in midterm elections seen as a referendum on their president’s performance. The voting coincides with a government giveaway of 10 million TVs.• The Chinese ship disaster’s aftermath.Crews today righted a cruise ship that capsized on the Yangtze River, four days after it overturned with more than 400 people aboard. Only 14 survivors have been found.MARKETS• Greece apparently got a reprieve from today’s debt deadline by invoking a little-used option to bundle payments totaling $1.7 billion until the end of June.But the Athens stock market fell 4.5 percent on continued anxiety about a possible default.• OPEC ministers left production levels alone at their meeting in Vienna today. The price of oil has settled around $62 a barrel in recent weeks.• Walmart today elected Greg Penner, 45, as chairman to replace Rob Walton, who has chaired the company for 23 years and is a son of Walmart’s founder, Sam Walton.• A “Viagra for women” drug could be approved in August by the F.D.A. after its endorsement by an advisory committee on Thursday.• First prize in the Defense Department’s Robotics Challenge finals, which start today, is $2 million. Twenty-four teams are competing in a circuit of physical tasks that could help humans in natural and man-made disasters.• Bids for lunch with the oracle of Omaha, Warren E. Buffett, are already well over $1 million. The auction, which raises money for charity, ends at 10:30 p.m. Eastern.• Wall Street stocks are choppy. European shares fell sharply, while Asian indexes ended mixed.NOTEWORTHY• Not your typical spy.Melissa McCarthy stars as a C.I.A. agent who must infiltrate an arms dealer’s world and prevent global disaster in “Spy,” a new action comedy in theaters today.• Best-selling reads.Ashlee Vance’s “Elon Musk,” a biography of the PayPal co-founder who went on to lead SpaceX and Tesla Motors, is new on our nonfiction list.• A melding of the minds.In “SENSE8,” a show premiering today, eight people around the world find themselves linked, able to see and talk to one another. It’s from the creators of “The Matrix” films (streaming, Netflix).• Look who’s No. 1.“At. Long. Last. ASAP,” a rap album released early after an unauthorized leak online, tops the Billboard chart this week.• A $136 million find.A plumber in New York hit the jackpot when he found a $2 lottery ticket hidden behind a pipe in his unfinished basement.• Hitting to all fields.— At the French Open semifinals, the No. 8 seed Stan Warinka defeated No. 14 Jo-Wilfried Tsonga today. The top seed, Novak Djokovic, takes on No. 3 Andy Murray (11 a.m., NBC).The women’s final, between Serena Williams and Lucie Safarova, is Saturday (9 a.m. Eastern, NBC). The men’s final is Sunday (9 a.m. Eastern, NBC).— Game 2 of the N.B.A. finals is Sunday (8 p.m. Eastern, ABC). In Game 1, the Golden State Warriors defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers, 108-100.— Game 2 of the Stanley Cup final is Saturday (7:15 p.m. Eastern, NBC). The Chicago Blackhawks lead the Tampa Bay Lightning, 1-0, in the series.— American Pharoah is the favorite to take the Belmont Stakes on Saturday and become the first Triple Crown winner since 1978 (post time is 6:50 p.m. Eastern; coverage on NBC begins at 4:30 p.m.).— The Champions League soccer final between Barcelona and Juventus of Italy is in Berlin on Saturday (2:45 p.m. Eastern, Fox).—And the women’s soccer World Cup kicks off Saturday in Canada, with 24 teams competing until the July 5 final.BACK STORYFossilized ring-shaped cakes resembling doughnuts have been unearthed in Native American settlements dating back 8,000 years.That makes doughnuts something of a national treasure as we celebrate National Doughnut Day.In modern times, some credit for the doughnut goes to Anna Joralemon, who started selling Dutch “olykoek” (oil cake) in 1673 from a shop in New Amsterdam, today’s Manhattan.More than 200 years later, free doughnuts were handed to the huddled masses arriving at Ellis Island, as they were later to the hungry during the Great Depression.During World War I, Salvation Army volunteers used helmets as deep fryers and made holes in the dough with spent artillery shells to deliver doughnuts to American soldiers on the battlefield. They used this basic recipe.In World War II, women in the Red Cross, known as Doughnut Dollies, did the same to ensure that the treat was available.Today, Krispy Kreme is giving out free doughnuts. So is Dunkin’ Donuts, with the purchase of a drink, and many local doughnut shops are also taking part.Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.Want to get the briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.