WASHINGTON —  It is the hate that dare not speak its name.Since his arrival in 2013, Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, has managed to alienate, exasperate and generally agitate the plurality of his 99 colleagues in the Senate. In a highly partisan, hypercompetitive legislative body where solipsism is nearly a creed, Mr. Cruz stands out for his widely held reputation for putting Ted first.“I don’t think he’s been effective,” said Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, and the party’s nominee for president in 2008. “I think that’s pretty obvious. Shutting down the government? How did that work out?”Mr. Cruz is so unpopular that at one point not a single Republican senator would support his demand for a roll-call vote, known as a sufficient second, leaving Mr. Cruz standing on the Senate floor like a man with bird flu, everyone scattering to avoid him.In his presidential campaign, Mr. Cruz uses his role as an outsider as a source of strength. “It shouldn’t surprise anyone that the Washington establishment is against the candidacy of Ted Cruz,” said Rick Tyler, a spokesman for Mr. Cruz’s presidential campaign. “We are not looking for the approval of the Washington cartel.”Yet many Republicans are loath to criticize him on the record, largely for two reasons: They do not want to help him, and do not want him to hurt them.“I’m up in 2016,” said Senator Johnny Isakson of Georgia. “The dumbest thing for me to do” would be to criticize Mr. Cruz, who has proved to be popular in Georgia. “I’m going to be on the ballot with whoever the nominee is,” Mr. Isakson said.Other Republican senators up for re-election in swing states are seeking ways to help another, more popular colleague and presidential candidate — Senator Marco Rubio of Florida — without overtly criticizing Mr. Cruz.After the Republican debate on Tuesday, Senator Richard M. Burr of North Carolina, the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, suggested that Mr. Cruz may have divulged classified information on national television about a government surveillance program; he dutifully noted that Mr. Cruz did not sit on his committee while Mr. Rubio did. (Mr. Rubio has already received three endorsements from his Senate colleagues. Mr. Cruz: zero.)A few are more direct. Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire wrote to Mr. Cruz this year, railing against his suggestion that he might again shut down the government, this time over funding for Planned Parenthood.Then there are those Republicans in the vast middle, who do not want to hand Mr. Cruz ammunition for his favorite argument: that he is an outsider standing up to Washington insiders who loathe him simply because he is independent and smart.“I think you have to say that Senator Cruz is very bright, an outstanding debater and ambitious!” said Senator Richard C. Shelby of Alabama, barely able to conceal his grin.The antipathy toward Mr. Cruz is layered and longstanding, and stems largely from his nonsenatorial proclivities for holding up legislation; insulting members, even leaders, in personal terms; and targeting members of his own party when they do not join him in futile missions against the Obama administration.It began in his first few weeks in office, when Mr. Cruz suggested that President Obama’s nominee for defense secretary — Chuck Hagel, a  Vietnam veteran and Republican — had taken money from foreign adversaries.He capped that first year with a plan that shut down the government to protest the health care law — which the majority of Republicans thought was a failed strategy — and encouraged activists to harass the office staff of Republican senators who opposed him.Many senators have also found him to be rude and pushy. Last year, during a budget vote, he forced his colleagues to vote on an unrelated but politically helpful abortion measure at 2:30 a.m. In the summer, he called Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, a liar on the Senate floor, so enraging many senators that some thought a formal rebuke should have been considered.Unlike Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, who has liberal allies on civil liberties issues, or Senator Mike Lee of Utah, who has worked with Democrats on criminal justice reform, Mr. Cruz has not made friends across the aisle.“One of the things you have to be able to do is work with others,” said Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, who sparred bitterly with Mr. Cruz when he tried to lecture her on the Constitution during a committee meeting. “People have to respect you. That’s a learned characteristic. And he would have to learn it.”Republicans also dislike Mr. Cruz’s habit of calling those who do not agree with him — including Mr. McConnell — the worst epithet they can think of: Democrat. “I would appreciate it if Republicans running would show the public that the difference is between us and Democrats and not destroy others by suggesting there is not,” said Senator James M. Inhofe of Oklahoma.Even Mr. Lee, once a major ally, has started to back away. He and Mr. Cruz have been routine partners on news releases promoting conservative positions, and have often spoken on the floor as a team. But Mr. Lee’s name has been notably absent from Mr. Cruz’s efforts of late, unless Mr. Rubio is also involved. After the Senate passed a measure to repeal the health care law, Mr. Cruz and Mr. Lee were set to do a joint news release, but it never happened.“Lee’s biggest vulnerability and his biggest misstep was the 2013 government shutdown,” said Christopher F. Karpowitz, an associate director of Brigham Young University’s Center for the Study of Elections and Democracy. “Perhaps he’s just being risk-averse and distinguishing himself from Cruz,” he said.Colleagues are also rankled by Mr. Cruz’s lack of involvement in the committees he serves on and his failure to spearhead legislation. “Look at the record,” said Senator Angus King, independent of Maine, who is one of the least partisan members of the Senate and is known for his dedication to all manner of hearings.Last week, Mr. Cruz failed to show up at a Judiciary Committee meeting focused on national security legislation, including his own contentious bill that sought to give the president powers to strip the citizenship of people who associate with terrorist groups. Instead, he was giving a speech on national security to a conservative policy group.It was the second time that Mr. Cruz had skipped a committee meeting about his own bill. The first was in November, when Mr. Cruz spoke on the Senate floor about his legislation rather than join the rest of his colleagues who had convened to discuss it.The complaint spreads across committees. “His involvement in the Armed Services Committee has been minimal,” Mr. McCain said.