On the final night of Hong Kong’s largest Occupy camp, a crowd of protesters swelled along an empty highway. It had been 74 days since the first canister of tear gas hit democracy supporters armed with only umbrellas, setting off what the city soon came to call the Umbrella Revolution. It had been more than two months since protesters first sat on that street in their raincoats, sleepless and worried that the military would soon arrive. The fear had now dissipated, and on this cool December evening, the atmosphere was raucous and festive. People filled the empty spaces between tents, spilling out of a metro stop and pouring over concrete barriers with the help of carefully constructed wooden steps. They lined up for free souvenirs — silk-screened T-shirts, leather necklaces, protest stickers — and gathered around microphones for open meetings. They threw glitter and snapped photographs. They sang along to pop songs crooned by a man called Bananaooyoo (now a protest icon whose signature color, like that of the protest itself, is yellow). Archivists removed pieces of artwork for safekeeping, and a few activists hung yellow banners: “We’ll be back.”The camp they were leaving behind had grown to hundreds of yards in length, its irregular boundaries defined by tangled barriers of metal and plastic, hastily secured with zip ties. A lone cluster of tents closest to one of the more distant barriers quietly celebrated its term as the farthest outpost of the camp, in the shadow of the Hong Kong headquarters of the People’s Liberation Army. As I poked my head inside a tent, a protester announced, “We are the First Defensive Line!”The First Defensive Line comprised a rotating crew of about 20 students and young people. “We were a materials station,” explained a petite education student named Jodi Li, who wore thick-rimmed glasses and had an easy high-pitched giggle. “Now we become a . . . sleeping station? I don’t know. There are little materials now.” At the height of the protests, they supplied protesters with hard hats, plastic goggles and bottles of water. “We can’t protect them, but at least we can ask them to protect themselves,” she said. They had watched the movements of the police just outside the barriers and sent messages to other supply tents. Now they were squeezed in under a blue canopy, dumping foam platters of raw meat into a pot on a hot plate, singing dirty songs and shouting invectives against the Hong Kong leadership: “The government is suck!”“It’s our goodbye party,” said a skinny 18-year-old named Marco Chan, smiling glumly. “There will not be a second time to have such experience — to live with these people on the street for two months.”By this last night at the camp on Harcourt Road, a few hundred feet from Hong Kong’s Legislative Council complex (LegCo), an unparalleled spirit of defiance had shaken the city: 955 people were arrested, and 1,900 people filed complaints against the police. Protesters fought off violent thugs (who had appeared mysteriously at night, their faces covered), got faces full of pepper spray and lungs full of tear gas. Over two months, they had adapted their lives to the realities of long-term protest — finishing homework in tents, working during the day and moving in and out of the camp with the rhythm of the metro trains.Hong Kong is a city whose self-conception is, above all, as a good place — a polite place — to do business. It scores well in global transparency studies. Taxes are kept low to encourage commerce. Nominally, under the arrangement known as One Country, Two Systems, the city is free to govern itself. But under Hong Kong’s strange mix of authoritarianism and corporatism, the general public votes on only half of the seats in the city legislature, with many of the remaining seats decided by corporations. The city leader, known as the chief executive, is selected by an electoral committee, a majority of whose members are not subject to popular vote and are widely believed to be under the control of mainland China.Despite this, people in Hong Kong have held out hope that Beijing might eventually allow them real democracy. This hope was dashed last August, when China issued an edict that reserved the power to choose the candidates for Hong Kong’s highest leadership position. The decision spurred the democracy movement into the streets, where protesters demanded the opportunity to nominate and elect their own chief executive — the chance to do better. The odds of bringing Beijing to the negotiating table were, from the beginning, understood as slim, but the protesters aimed to show China’s leaders their displeasure. “It’s a war, not just a battle,” Joshua Wong, Hong Kong’s most famous student activist, told me the day after Occupy ended. “We still have time.”No one planned the Umbrella Revolution, at least not the way it actually unfolded. It began as a movement called Occupy Central With Love and Peace, the brainchild of a tidily dressed law professor at the University of Hong Kong named Benny Tai, who works out of a narrow office where bookcases run from floor to ceiling — even his scholarly clutter is well dusted and clean. He speaks with the slight British accent that is common in Hong Kong and manages to sound enthusiastic about his subject without a single change in his expression. “I see myself more as an idea carrier,” Tai told me, when we met at his office. “I contribute an idea, and that’s it,” he explained. Then he added, “Now I more and more understand that ideas can be very dangerous.”Tai floated his idea two years ago in a column in The Hong Kong Economic Journal. He proposed a new set of tactics for the city’s democracy movement, which had grown somewhat predictable and toothless over the years: an annual candlelight vigil on the anniversary of Tiananmen Square and a protest every July 1 to mark the city’s handover to China. “The power of civil disobedience lies with using nonviolent methods to break the law,” Tai wrote, “thereby appealing to the general public’s sense of justice.”As a student in the 1980s, Tai served on a 180-person committee that oversaw the drafting of Hong Kong’s Constitution, a document that called for Hong Kong’s autonomy but gave sweeping powers to the city’s chief executive. It also left Hong Kong with a system of government that puts power directly into the hands of the city’s business elite. Half the seats in Hong Kong’s legislature are determined by so-called functional constituencies — voting blocs grouped by industry rather than by geographic district. “A lot of the votes in functional constituencies are actually corporate votes; they’re not even given to human individuals,” Anson Chan, the 75-year-old woman who ran the city’s Civil Service before and after the handover, told me over cups of tea at the office of her pro-democracy group, Hong Kong 2020. “So if you are a big business tycoon in Hong Kong, and you have a dozen companies, all of which are eligible to vote, you essentially not just have one vote or two votes, you have a dozen votes.” While there are 3.5 million eligible voters for the 35 seats divided by geography, there are only 232,000 people and corporations voting in the functional constituencies.A result of this system, according to Tai and many protesters, is growing economic inequality — and a hated chief executive: Leung Chun-ying, a former real estate surveyor with a penchant for insensitive comments. Leung was elected to the position in 2012 by the 1,200-member committee that decides the office, most of whom are not subject to popular elections. After a campaign in which he accused his opponent of having an illegal structure in his home, Leung turned out to have illegal structures in his own. He later pushed an education-reform package that emphasized a rosy, more patriotic picture of Beijing (it was ultimately dropped). Leung, who is better known as C.Y. Leung, is so reviled that toilet paper was sold with his face on it; at an appearance at LegCo, a legislator threw a bun at him. In an interview with foreign media during the protests, he warned that democracy would turn Hong Kong over to the poor. “Then you would end up with that kind of politics and policies,” he said, ominously.Leung’s administration has also presided over a slide in the standard of living. Hong Kong’s businesses are increasingly tied to mainland China and seen as beholden to leaders in Beijing. Over the past 10 years, the median income in the city has increased by 30 percent, even as G.D.P. has grown by 60 percent. Twenty percent of Hong Kong’s population is living under the official poverty line, but the city’s 50 richest people, according to the annual list compiled by Forbes, are worth a total of $236 billion (Hong Kong’s entire G.D.P. in 2013, by comparison, was $274 billion). Tai paid lip service to economic inequality in the name of his movement — Occupy — but his demands were more modest, limited only to the election of the city’s chief executive. “It’s just getting Hong Kong people to have that right to vote and have a true election,” he said. “It’s a first step only.” By the time I arrived at the camp on Harcourt Road, comparisons with other global protests had started to grate on the leaders; they did not aim to overthrow a government, they pointed out, or to challenge an entire economic system. The movement’s name changed to the Umbrella Revolution to reflect not just the literal image of umbrellas as shields but also how participation had expanded.“Many people interpret this movement as sort of young people dissatisfied with the current economic environment,” Christopher Lau, a member of the pro-democracy party People Power, told me. “This is the case, but this is a case that is shared with the rest of the world. So I don’t want to overinterpret this. The movement itself is more like a deep-down frustration. We’ve been told the hard truth that, Sorry, no democracy for Hong Kong as long as the Communist Party is in charge.”For the party, the protests have threatened to become a powerful symbol of liberalization and economic prosperity. In arguing for democracy, Tai was pitting himself not against Leung but against leaders on the mainland (“Leung Chun-ying is widely understood as an underground C.C.P. member and a puppet of Beijing,” reads an introduction on the Occupy Central website). The only way to measure Beijing’s response has been through crackdowns. In mainland China, those thought to be supporters of the protest — even those who just expressed support online — have been thrown in jail. Late in the protest, when China’s president, Xi Jinping, made a trip to Macau on a rainy day, journalists were not allowed to carry umbrellas.From the first days of Occupy Central With Love and Peace, Tai’s most visible collaborators were college students. The Hong Kong Federation of Students, a group that includes representatives from many of Hong Kong’s universities, helped organize a series of town-hall meetings with Occupy Central, the first of which had 700 participants. It also attracted the attention of Wong, who has been a celebrity in Hong Kong since 2012, when, at 15, his group Scholarism fought against a program of nationalistic educational reform. With thick glasses and a bowl haircut, Wong, skinny and looking even younger than he was, organized protests and held a hunger strike. He became so famous that when the results of his college entrance exam came out, he had to hold a news conference.When Wong heard about Occupy, he had already been considering taking Scholarism in a different direction. “Rather than reject the things that we don’t want, we want to fight for the things we want,” he told me, sitting in a coffee shop not far from the cleared protest camp, texting on his phone as he spoke. The movement, he felt, belonged to the students.Occupy Central With Love and Peace started with meetings to discuss changes to Hong Kong’s electoral system. The city’s government would hold five months of public hearings before Beijing announced its finalized plans. Occupy Central held a civil referendum on the form the election could take. Its final move would be to take over a section of Hong Kong’s Central district during a national holiday in October. Tai estimated they would occupy the space for five days at most and, because of a national holiday, disrupt only one business day. They would go forward with the plan, he said, only if Beijing did not make any concessions. Tai and the others hoped that just the threat of such a mass movement would be enough to sway the mainland. The group held a series of smaller events last summer, and after the annual July 1 march, 511 students were arrested during a sit-in.Not surprisingly, it had little effect. On Aug. 31, the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress, Beijing’s leadership, issued its proposal: Hong Kong could vote for chief executive, but it could not nominate the candidates. That would be left to the same committee that selected Leung. Beijing was essentially offering the Hong Kong people a chance to choose between three different Leungs. “After the 31st of August decision, there was no way out,” Tai said. “We had to continue our occupation action.”But a series of snap decisions by the students caused the plans to scramble. The students staged a strike in advance of the Occupy protest. On what was to be the strike’s final night, Joshua Wong and the leaders of the H.K.F.S. decided to storm Civic Square, next to LegCo, in one final dramatic gesture. Alex Chow, the secretary general of H.K.F.S., told me that to win more popular support, the students knew they needed to make some kind of sacrifice. This would be it. Wong got onstage in front of LegCo and shouted the plan into a microphone. Students started running toward the square; the security fence offered little resistance.The police responded with pepper spray and batons. Protesters shouted, “Shame on the police!” and protected themselves with open umbrellas. By Saturday, Wong, Chow and the rest of the fence-jumpers had been arrested, and the crowd of students began to swell in support. The police arrived to surround them. In response, Benny Tai announced that Occupy Central would start early — and it would start in Admiralty, the neighborhood near LegCo, where the students had already gathered.Tai’s call brought his followers to the site. The streets around LegCo — Harcourt Road, Tim Mei Avenue and Tamar Street — weren’t nearly wide enough to hold the numbers. They shut down all eight lanes of Connaught Road. That night, C. Y. Leung went on television and said he was confident that the police would use appropriate tactics. A few hours later, the first canister of tear gas hit the crowd.The image of protesters holding up umbrellas, fighting off a cloud of toxic smoke, galvanized people who had previously been ambivalent about the democracy movement. “We kind of hoped that the police would use tear gas,” Lau, of People Power, told me. “Unfortunately for those who suffered from the tear gas. But for the whole movement, the police showed they would use excessive force — and that got us sympathy.”Jodi and her boyfriend, Jack Chan, were initially only loosely interested in social issues. They attended the June 4 vigil nearly every year but otherwise paid little attention to politics. Instead, they were more interested in each other. (Jack has a habit of announcing, “Jodi is my girl!” in rising pitch whenever the subject comes up.) They followed the protests online, watching their friends’ Facebook feeds, and when the students were arrested in Civic Square, Jodi called him.“I wanted to go, but he didn't let me!” she told me when we talked inside the tent. “He thinks it’s dangerous. But then he came here, and then — whoops! — I came here, too.”Jack had gone to Harcourt Road with a friend, where they mixed in with the crowd and shouted a few slogans. Marco Chan was there as well, not yet friends with Jack and Jodi. He was small and easily got lost in the mass of people. “The police suddenly used tear gas,” he told me. The crowd rippled out from the smoking canisters by instinct. “People kept on telling you: ‘Slow! Slow! Don’t be afraid, just slowly walk away.’ And that doesn’t work. At the end, people started running.”A canister hit the pavement near where Jack was standing. He ran, tripped and fell down. He waited for a first-aid volunteer to come help him — the volunteer, a student named Eugene, was his first new friend in the protest movement.That day, Hong Kong’s police threw 87 canisters of tear gas at the crowd. They aimed pepper spray at people who did their best to protect themselves with umbrellas. In a city with a history of polite protest, where the last tear-gas incident happened nine years ago and on a much smaller scale during W.T.O. protests, the images coming out of Admiralty were shocking. Protesters scattered, but only for a moment. Instead, supporters who saw the images on television showed up on the scene. Eventually the police retreated, and protesters sat down on the streets.“It’s very easy to handle the tear gas,” Jack told me. The key, he explained, is not to panic. “It’s like if you get dropped in water and you’re too scared, you’ll die very fast.” Students started arming themselves with wet washcloths, masks and goggles. They learned to walk away slowly, breathing shallowly and avoiding the worst of the cloud.On the first night, and for the next two weeks, rumors rippled through the new camp. Protesters were fearful of a bloody crackdown, like what happened in Tiananmen Square. “They said the police would use guns,” Jodi said. “They will do all these horrible things.”“Tanks!” Marco added.For the students on Harcourt Road, the worry that mainland China would call in the People’s Liberation Army was real. They sat with raincoats on, in expectation of the police arriving with more tear gas, but they realized how useless these would be if the police started using bullets. Despite the fear, the movement had gathered its own momentum.“People brought us supplies,” said Jodi, who arrived at the protest site the day after the tear gas. Marco came back the next day as well, volunteering to help clean up. Wing Sham, an architecture student, did the same. “The first days, it was just umbrellas,” Wing said. Jodi added, “Then water, umbrellas and masks.” Someone, Marco remembered, donated an enormous amount of bananas. “It was really horrible,” Jack said. “I will never eat a banana after that.”Nearly all the students started lying to their parents about where they were. “I would tell my boss I needed sick leave, and I would tell my parents that I need to go to work,” Wing recalled. Jodi told her parents she needed the time to work on a school art project. She would spend evenings in Admiralty, writing essays on her phone.At one point, the Hong Kong Federation of Students issued an order to retreat, but no one did. “The occupation was a very unique situation,” Tai said. “If people want to leave, they would have left — there is no need to discuss. They would just use their feet to indicate their preference. Those who stay, they have a kind of veto power.”The Hong Kong Federation of Students is headquartered in a small high-rise tucked in between a highway and a market in Hong Kong’s Mong Kok district. It shares the building with a handful of small companies. “The carpet company really hates us,” Alex Chow said; the owners opposed the protests. Chow is a bookish student of comparative literature and sociology, with a history of becoming emotional in front of crowds. When he was appointed to the H.K.F.S. in the spring of 2014, he was a bit shy and wary of public speaking. His deputy, Lester Shum, was the outspoken one. After the movement began and the pair became famous, signs started popping up turning their silhouettes into protest art and even combining their name: Alexter.In the early days of Occupy, Chow and other student leaders spent most of their time in meetings, strategizing for the protests. They already had a meeting scheduled for Oct. 21 with Hong Kong’s chief secretary, Carrie Lam, when on Oct. 2 the H.K.F.S. issued an open letter asking that the meeting be broadcast. “C. Y. Leung has already lost his integrity and any ruling legitimacy,” their letter claimed. “Hong Kongers resorting onto the streets is the inevitable consequence of being failed or cheated repeatedly in the last 30 years.”On the day of the meeting, huge screens were set up in Admiralty. Thousands of protesters squeezed between tents to watch. The students showed up in T-shirts with “Freedom Now” scrawled across the front in green script. The government representatives wore suits. The meeting started politely but quickly hit a wall: The decision handed down by the Central Chinese government on Aug. 31 was nonnegotiable, Lam said. She offered to submit a report to Beijing on Hong Kong’s popular opposition and hinted at more progress in elections taking place after 2017.“I felt like I was talking to fake persons,” Yvonne Leung, an H.K.F.S. leader, told me. “Made of wood or plastic.”The possibility that the government would not offer any concessions had already started to set in. Factions with differing tactics and goals began to form in the camps. Some wanted more aggressive protests. Some wanted Hong Kong to protest for a “city-state solution” — meaning independence from mainland China. “It’s a pity that the alliance from Day 1 to Day 79 could not really happen,” Chow admitted. In November, Chow and some of his H.K.F.S. colleagues tried to fly to Beijing to confront the central leadership during the annual meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Leadership Summit. They were turned away at the airport.In the meantime, protesters in the camps were doing their best to balance their lives with long-term occupation. A study tent was set up in Admiralty, along with a power station where people could charge their phones. The camps would clear out during the days — tents flapping in the breeze along the overpasses — then fill up again after dark. High-school students rushed home on the last train of the night. It was a euphoric, exhausting schedule, one that students recognized would be difficult to keep up.In early November, a handful of bus companies and transportation organizations began filing injunctions against the camps for blocking traffic. The protests had been disrupting commutes. For both the government and the students, these lawsuits offered a quiet, nonconfrontational way to dissolve the camps. The cases started working their way through the courts. The police would occasionally make an effort to move barriers, pepper spraying and using their batons as they went.The end finally came in early December, after Hong Kong’s courts granted an injunction to one bus company. Harcourt Road, the heart of the protest, was forced to dissolve. The night before it happened, as people sang along with Bananaooyoo, a protester yelled at them through a megaphone: “Do you think you can change the government with a singalong?” Alex Chow and Joshua Wong met with other student groups to try to negotiate a quiet departure. By the morning, the huge crowd of the night before had mostly packed up and left. The First Defensive Line had all gone home.When I visited the H.K.F.S. office in late December, students had done their best to clear away the mess from weeks of occupation. They moved a cot into the corner of the room and cleared a way to the television, so they could play games on an old Nintendo Wii. Chow was busy doing dishes, and the remnants of a hot-pot celebration the night before were still covering half the communal office table. Student leaders were gossiping about the recent conviction of Hong Kong’s former chief secretary, a man named Rafael Hui, in the highest level corruption case in the city’s history — another sign of the city’s decline. The students were letting other groups organize the protests going on outside.“Hopefully I will be graduating next semester,” Chow told me, swiveling fitfully in an office chair. He had finally gotten a haircut. “My plan is to apply for a master’s in philosophy.” He was also considering journalism, he said. “I have a strong sense that I would like to stay in the public sphere, but I’m not sure.” He felt he needed more academic training to help him form a strategy for Hong Kong’s future.Chow plans on stepping down as the head of the H.K.F.S. next month; Lester Shum will be stepping down as well. In the meantime, Chow and Shum can’t walk down the street in Hong Kong without being recognized. Some people grin and give them thumbs up, though occasionally people will scold them.“It matters,” Lau said, “although the movement is not successful because the government didn’t yield to any of our requests.” The importance of the movement, he explained, was to show that Hong Kong could do more. “All these protests that you guys find normal in the States or Europe or France, Hong Kong people detested it. They thought, We cannot have this kind of chaos in Hong Kong, we are an economic city.”The end of Occupy did not entirely snuff out the Umbrella Revolution. As soon as the camps closed down, other, smaller protests started popping up around the city. A group of activists hung a yellow banner on a cliff face known as Lion Rock, and the police had to use a helicopter to get it down. Nightly crowds gathered in Mong Kok, and as Christmas approached, groups of singers roamed the streets, singing protest songs to the tune of carols, like “O Come All Ye Faithful”:Everyone has head injuries and bloody limbsEveryone has a long scar from a healing wound on their foreheadEvil police angrily wave their batons, hoping to kill a few pedestriansThe first large-scale protest since the occupation was held on Feb. 1, organized by the Civil Human Rights Front. They marched peacefully, carrying the familiar yellow umbrellas of the movement, but with just an estimated 13,000 people, the crowd was smaller than expected. “Maybe this is a not a negative thing,” Chow told me. The diversity of opinions that he had struggled with in the protest zone could be a source of strength in Hong Kong’s post-Occupy movement. Members of H.K.F.S. argued that each small act of protest would keep the movement going.For the students in the First Defensive Line, the movement didn’t change their daily lives, but it changed them. I met up with a few of them at a Häagen-Dazs in Mong Kok a few days after the protest. Jodi had a yellow ribbon pinned just beneath her scarf. “We didn’t successfully fight for what we wanted,” she said. “But more and more teenagers will think more about the government and society, and one day we will have some success. Not this month or next year. I believe it will be a long fight.”“I met a new family here,” Wing Sham said. Marco, who was leaning back in his chair, his hands stuffed in his jacket pockets, let everyone else finish before he spoke. “Before the movement, I was a normal teenager who stayed at home without any meaning,” he told the table. “I believe I will join more social care work and care about society.”The next measurable step for the Hong Kong protests happens in the legislature, where the constitutional reforms required to change Hong Kong’s electoral system have to come to a vote. In a mechanism that still limits Beijing’s power in the city, any change to the way the chief executive is elected requires a two-thirds majority in LegCo. Hong Kong’s pan-democratic leaders have pledged to veto the measure — a symbolic gesture, Anson Chan told me, but one that will at least keep the question of democracy in the air.“You can’t treat the young people in Hong Kong as if their minds are a blank sheet of paper on which you can write at will,” she said. “The young people through this Umbrella Revolution have demonstrated that they have a mind of their own. Furthermore, they are no longer politically apathetic,” she said. “They’re prepared to stand up and be counted.”