Peeking at what your fellow passengers are reading is a time-honored sport on the New York subway. The Amsterdam-based photographer Reinier Gerritsen captures his peeks for posterity in “The Last Book,” a collection of candid photos of subterranean readers. Gerritsen comes to New York for two weeks three times a year and spent 13 weeks shooting straphangers for the project. No e-readers were allowed. “I read only printed books,” Gerritsen said via email, though he owned up to having an iPad.“Sometimes I thought, a book is like a piece of clothing, it matches a person so well,” he said of his subjects. “Of course he is reading Franzen, and she Auster, and another, she reads Murakami.” He expressed surprise at the number of people he saw reading the Bible.During his time underground, Gerritsen witnessed “a lot of ‘Fifty Shades of Grey,’ and one of the readers had a handmade dust cover of neutral white paper, to hide what she was reading. Unfortunately she was standing beside me, and due to the overcrowded car I couldn’t move some distance to make a photo.”He worked primarily on the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 trains, but was advised by a few people “to go to the L line. The books were supposed to be more interesting over there.”His photos, many of which were downsized for the book, are on full display at the Julie Saul Gallery in Chelsea through Feb. 7.Quotable“I had this fear that this was the haunted or bad-luck book and that I would die before I finished it. It would be an unfinished novel about the guy who wrote the unfinished novel!” — Stewart O’Nan discussing “West of Sunset,” his novel about F. Scott Fitzgerald, in an interview with the Los Angeles TimesReconstruction’s RelevanceThis week, Kevin Baker reviews “Gateway to Freedom,” Eric Foner’s new book about the Underground Railroad. Foner also recently published an updated edition of “Reconstruction,” his award-winning book about America after the Civil War. Reviewing it in the Book Review when it was first published in 1988, William S. McFeely called it a “splendid” work that signaled Foner as the “pre-eminent historian of Reconstruction.”In an introduction to the new edition, Foner writes: “Even if we remain unaware of it, Reconstruction is part of our lives even today. Issues that agitate American politics — who is an American citizen and what rights come along with citizenship, the relative powers of the national government and the states, affirmative action, the relationship between political and economic democracy, the proper response to terrorism — are Reconstruction questions.”