Ahead of President Obama’s trip this week to Kenya and Ethiopia, we asked readers in Africa or from there to share their views of his presidency. Readers discussed their expectations for Mr. Obama when he was first elected in 2008, and whether they thought he had helped or failed Africa during his presidency. Some readers also shared their thoughts on what issues Mr. Obama should focus on for the remainder of his term.We received more than 100 responses, representing a range of views and coming from about a dozen African countries. Here is a selection of the responses. They have been edited and condensed for clarity.A Big DisappointmentI had great expectations from President Obama’s election. I expected him to exert a greater influence on African dictators who abuse human rights and are very corrupt. Seven years later, I don’t think he has delivered much in the mentioned areas. The dictators are unscathed, whereas human rights campaigners are unjustly arrested and detained.A few years ago, Mr. Obama came up with the idea of powering Africa. This is a great initiative. I am afraid it is not gonna work because the corrupt dictators will divert the money to invest in energy infrastructure to theirs and their kids’ offshore bank accounts. Summing up, on Africa he has been a complete disappointment!— D.C. Siona, 33, from Angola.A Need to Focus on EducationWhen Obama was elected, he brought hope. Yes, my expectations are met. Obama is doing for Africa what any American president would do. But we cannot expect him to replace African presidents.Obama did not fail Africa at all. As always, some people have really high expectations. But we all know that Obama does not have free hands to pass any bill in Congress.Education is one of the biggest problems in Africa. I would like President Obama to encourage our African presidents to build more schools and pay teachers well.— Josephine, who lives in the United States, is from Guinea.An Irrelevant PresidencyI did not have any expectations for Obama because, quite frankly, Western leaders seldom care about Africa or its people unless oil or other such incentives are involved.Maybe in Kenya his presidency has made a positive impact, but in southern Africa, where I live, his presidency has been pretty irrelevant.— T. Victoria Mberengo, 18, from Zimbabwe.Hopes for Economic AttentionWith excitement, I expected the president of the world’s economic superpower to shift economic attention to Africa. For decades Western investors have only viewed African countries as a vast source for raw material, and once they are exploited, then Africa’s usefulness is done. We need a more symbiotic economic relationship with America, as China is doing at the moment. American investors need to focus on Kenyan firms as long-term business partners, with a growing middle class offering a ready market and a long-term market guarantee.— Ezra Monari, 27, from Nairobi, Kenya.Honesty With African LeadersI expected him to be exactly what he has been: honest and direct with the African leaders.By being honest with African leaders, he has shown them that a leader is a servant of the people.— James DonuBari Nalley, 58, who lives in Houston, is from Nigeria.Little AccomplishedAs far as Africa is concerned, I expected the president of the superpower nation to chip in and help eradicate most of the problems that Africans face and their likely causes. Some of these problems, among others, are poverty, diseases and an alarming rate of unemployment. Most of these problems were initiated and managed by poor governance and the rampant corruption which has been taken as a lifestyle and part of us.There is little that Obama has done to help Africa overcome these challenges.He has left Africa to think that the United States can’t be in a position to intervene. He has left most of these nations to shift to the East in seeking for help.— Kipkirui Cosmas Lang’at, 29, from Kericho, Kenya.A Model for LeadershipObama’s presidency has assisted Africa in several ways. He challenges African leaders to take a cue from America to build strong institutions of governance to deepen our democracy.— Olayimika Timi Oderinde, 72, from Nigeria.Africa Fails HerselfIn my view President Obama hasn’t failed Africa; he is playing his part well. Only Mama Africa is failing herself. The people of the United States and the government of the U.S. support Mama Africa in all ways possible, but Mama Africa is failing herself on grounds of corruption, greed, conflicts and embezzlement of funds by top senior government officials and their relatives.I am advising myself and other Africans to stop blaming others for our failure.— Emmanuel Egesa, 28, from Uganda.A Psychological BoostI was just ecstatic with his election. I didn’t expect much from him to be honest. I know there are limits to the presidency. I think his election, as a dark-skinned man, to be president had and still has an immense psychological boost for a lot of us.He should demand good governance, accountability and concrete outcomes for every penny African governments get.— Birhanu, 29, from Ethiopia.Individual DeterminationI think up to now President Obama has done a great job, in terms of equality, social responsibility and also he is an example for young leaders to show that it’s not the color of a person that makes a president, but it’s the individual determination to make a better world.— Rick-Ernest Bonnier, 24, from Republic Of Mauritius.Chinese Influence As a young African leader, I expected that Obama would increase and strengthen the United States’ ties with Africa. I believe he has met some of these expectations, however, I feel that the United States has let the Chinese influence on the continent catapult especially during his tenure.— Peace Liz Sasha Musonge, 33, from Uganda.Leave Africa AloneI wish him to serve well the interest of the United States and to let Africa solve its issues.— Joseph, 38, from Rwanda.