LONDON —  Prime Minister David Cameron hopes to escalate Britain’s role in the campaign against the Islamic State, and at the same time stem the rise of jihadists at home, according to remarks he made on Sunday and excerpts from a planned speech.“I want us to step up and do more,” he said in an interview on NBC’s “Meet the Press.”Mr. Cameron, whose Conservative Party won convincingly at the polls in May, said he would seek to expand British airstrikes against the Islamic State to territory in Syria; Britain is already conducting airstrikes in Iraq. Though Parliament rejected strikes in Syria in 2013, it was revealed last week that British pilots embedded with coalition forces have been taking part in operations in Syria. Britain has provided logistics, air-to-air refueling and surveillance, Mr. Cameron said.The prime minister said he would seek parliamentary support to go further and undertake airstrikes in Syria later this year.“Be in no doubt, we’re committed to working with you to destroy the caliphate in both countries,” he said on NBC, referring to the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIS and ISIL.“We have to destroy this caliphate, whether it is in Iraq or in Syria,” he said. “That is a key part of defeating this terrorist scourge that we face. I want Britain to do more, I always have to take my Parliament with me. We’re talking and discussing at the moment, including with the opposition parties in Britain, what more we can do.”The Labour Party, which is in the midst of a leadership contest, did not immediately reply to requests for comment.Mr. Cameron will also lay out a five-year plan to confront radicalism in Britain in a speech to be given on Monday.“We must deglamorize the extremist cause, especially ISIL,” Mr. Cameron says in the prepared remarks, excerpts from which were released by his office. “This isn’t a pioneering movement — it is vicious, brutal, fundamentally abhorrent.”“Any strategy to defeat extremism must confront, head on, the extreme ideology that underpins it,” he adds. “We must take its component parts to pieces — the cultish worldview, the conspiracy theories and, yes, the so-called glamorous parts of it, too. In doing so, let’s not forget our strongest weapon: our own liberal values.”Some of his new proposals are likely to exacerbate concerns from critics who have been concerned about a loss of civil liberties amid the struggle against terrorism. On the other hand, hundreds of Britons are believed to have traveled to the Middle East to join the Islamic State and other extremist groups, heightening fears of growing domestic radicalism.Mr. Cameron will call for new laws to “rein in those who quietly condone ISIS” and “those who explicitly advocate violence against the West,” according to a report in The Sunday Times. He will also seek new rules to prevent jihadist ideals being taught in the nation’s schools, as well as new funds for groups that fight extremism. And he will seek to create a new legal definition of extremism “encompassing opposition to democracy, the rule of law and religious tolerance,” the newspaper reported.The moves follow the terrorist attack at a resort in Tunisia last month, in which most of the victims were Britons.“We’ve seen this appalling attack on the Tunisian beach, where 30 of my own citizens were butchered by an ISIL terrorist,” Mr. Cameron told NBC. “This is the big threat that we face.”