HOUSTON —  Hillary Rodham Clinton on Thursday accused Republicans including her potential rivals Jeb Bush, Scott Walker and Rick Perry of “deliberately trying to stop” young people and minorities — both vital Democratic constituencies — from exercising their right to vote, as she presented an ambitious agenda to make it easier for those groups and other Americans to participate in elections.Speaking at Texas Southern University here in front of her largest crowd yet as a candidate for the 2016 Democratic presidential nomination, Mrs. Clinton accused Republicans generally of enacting state voting laws based on what she called “a phantom epidemic of election fraud” because they are “scared of letting citizens have their say.”“What is happening is a sweeping effort to disempower and disenfranchise people of color, poor people and young people from one end of our country to the other,” Mrs. Clinton told a crowd of about 2,000 in a basketball arena at the historically black campus.She called for automatic voter registration in every state when young people turn 18, criticized Republican-sponsored voting laws in North Carolina, Texas and Wisconsin, and urged Congress to take immediate action to reinstate an important provision of the Voting Rights Act that she said the Supreme Court had “eviscerated” in a 2013 ruling.In addition to areas she said needed to be addressed, like easier online registration, shorter lines at polling precincts and a minimum of 20 days for early voting before an election, Mrs. Clinton called for a nationwide law modeled on one recently passed in Oregon that automatically adds voters to the rolls when they turn 18, using driver’s license data. Residents would have to opt out to avoid being added to the voter rolls.But she also used the occasion to attack by name several of her potential Republican rivals.“There are people who offer themselves to be leaders whose actions have undercut this fundamental American principle,” Mrs. Clinton said.Mr. Perry, the former Texas governor who formally entered the race for the Republican nomination on Thursday, “signed a law that a federal court said was actually written with the purpose of discriminating against minority voters,” she said, and he “applauded” when the Voting Rights Act was “gutted.”“But Governor Perry is hardly alone in his crusade against voting rights,” Mrs. Clinton continued. In Wisconsin, Governor Walker “cut back early voting and signed legislation that would make it harder for college students to vote,” she said. Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey “vetoed legislation to extend early voting.” And when Jeb Bush was governor of Florida, she recalled, “state authorities conducted a deeply flawed purge of voters before the presidential election in 2000” that sent his brother George W. Bush to the White House.“What part of democracy are they afraid of?” she said.Orlando Watson, a spokesman for the Republican National Committee, called Mrs. Clinton’s remarks “misleading and divisive” and “shameless,” and said they “ignore the fact her Democrat-led home state of New York does not allow early voting while dozens of Republican-led states do.”Mrs. Clinton’s early and aggressive stance on voting rights could help bolster her liberal credentials and energize black voters. In her appearance at Texas Southern University, where blues music and a high school marching band played before she arrived, she invoked the civil rights leaders who worked on the 1965 Voting Rights Act, in a speech that had the feel of an impassioned pitch to the young and minority voters who largely supported Mr. Obama over Mrs. Clinton in 2008, and whom she will need to win in 2016.Mrs. Clinton recalled helping register poor and Hispanic voters in Texas for George S. McGovern’s presidential campaign in 1972. And she praised Barbara Jordan, the congresswoman and civil rights leader for whom an award Mrs. Clinton accepted on Thursday was named.Texas is a solidly red state, but by delivering her remarks here, Mrs. Clinton could communicate to voters in battleground states without seeming too overtly political, her supporters said.“Ohio will hear it. Pennsylvania will hear it,” said Representative Sheila Jackson Lee, a Texas Democrat who presented Mrs. Clinton with the inaugural Barbara Jordan Gold Medallion.“The rhetoric is great,” said Representative James E. Clyburn, a South Carolina Democrat and the highest-ranking African-American in Congress. “But that’s all you can do when you’re not in office, is talk,” he cautioned. “It takes getting elected to get something done.”Mr. Clyburn, who clashed with Bill Clinton on racial issues during the 2008 Democratic primary, said of Mrs. Clinton’s remarks, “I’d hope people would respond with their voting, sufficiently enough for her to win the office and follow through.”Mrs. Clinton spoke not just of minority voters, but also of young people who she said had been disenfranchised by new voting laws in states like Texas.“If you want to vote in this state, you can use a concealed weapon permit as a valid form of identification, but a valid student ID isn’t good enough,” Mrs. Clinton said.