TUNIS —  In a move that has surprised and enthralled many Algerians, the ailing President Abdelaziz Bouteflika has replaced his powerful intelligence chief in a shake-up of the security forces.The replaced official, Mohamed Mediene, better known by the nickname Toufik, headed the intelligence service for 25 years. Over that time he became a feared figure as he built the service into an immensely powerful institution, often referred to as a state within a state, which dominated the country’s fight against militants, but also political and social life.Mr. Mediene’s removal, announced unexpectedly on Sunday, came just a few weeks after the arrest of a former intelligence chief, Abdelkader Ait-Ouarabi, and the removal of several other intelligence officials. These steps have been viewed in Algeria as the fulfillment of Mr. Bouteflika’s long-stated aim to exert more civilian control over the military.But it is also seen as a move by the president to strengthen the power of his office as his health is failing and a struggle over his succession builds.Mr. Bouteflika, 78, who had a stroke in 2013, has rarely been seen in public since then. Yet he has confounded critics, securing a fourth term in office and now removing political adversaries in the intelligence service.“Now Bouteflika has succeeded,” said Rachid Tlemcani, a political analyst in Algiers who has been among the few to call openly for the intelligence service to be stopped from interfering in politics. “He retired some officials, and put friends in their places.”Algeria has been run by a clique of military and intelligence officials who forged their careers in the country’s fight for independence from France in the 1950s and ’60s. Mr. Mediene was a shadowy but important figure in supporting Mr. Bouteflika for president in successive elections.Mr. Mediene amassed power through collecting information and blackmailing politicians and other public servants, according to Geoff D. Porter, the founder and president of North Africa Risk Consulting, a security firm. Under his leadership the intelligence service also became a feared institution in its prosecution of suspects in Algeria’s fight against Islamists in the 1990s.Mr. Mediene always avoided publicity, and his name never appeared in print until last year, although it was known to almost every Algerian. His photograph was published for the first time in a local newspaper only on Sunday.Divisions between Mr. Mediene and Mr. Bouteflika became apparent when the president insisted on running for a fourth term last year, a move Mr. Mediene was said to have opposed.Since then the capital, Algiers, has swirled with conspiracy theories and rumors of coups. The only outward signs had been the incremental replacement of senior intelligence officials around Mr. Mediene.Then three senior security officials were removed in July. At the end of August, Mr. Ait-Ouarabi, a former counterterrorism chief and close ally of Mr. Mediene, better known as General Hassan, was arrested from his home. The daily newspaper El-Watan reported he was detained in the Blida military prison south of Algiers on charges of possessing stocks of weapons and forming an armed group.Two weeks later, on Sunday, a statement from the presidency said Mr. Mediene, 76, had retired and his deputy at the Intelligence and Security Department, or D.R.S., Gen. Bachir Tartag, would take over.While the process of democracy was not moving forward in Algeria, Mr. Mediene’s departure and the detention of a general represented some good, Mr. Tlemcani said. “The outcome is really hard to predict, but this is really positive,” he said. “For the people it means nobody is immune, nobody can be above the law.”