BEIJING — The latest book by the photographer Xu Yong is filled with the images of young Chinese idealists clamoring for democracy and denouncing the Communist Party, but he insists that there is nothing political about his decision to publish this trove of snapshots he had kept hidden for more than two decades.“This is an art book,” said Mr. Xu, 60, who has more than 20 photography books to his name. “I have no interest in discussing what they mean.”But the simple act of publishing images of the protests that convulsed Beijing in the spring of 1989 is likely to be viewed as a provocation by the hard-liners who currently rule China. In the ensuing years they have tried, with much success, to impose a collective amnesia on the nation by censoring photos and news accounts that are part of the historical record in the rest of the world.At a time when the government is seeking to silence its perceived ideological foes, it is easy to view Mr. Xu’s latest book, “Negatives,” as a brave, if somewhat foolhardy, venture. After all, scores of people, including several of Mr. Xu’s friends in the art world here, have been detained in recent months, some for simply sharing online photographs of the pro-democracy protests that roiled Hong Kong late last year.One of China’s best-known civil rights lawyers, Pu Zhiqiang, has been in police custody since last spring. What prompted the arrest? Joining a private gathering, at a friend’s apartment, to discuss the violent crackdown on protesters in Tiananmen Square 25 years earlier.“Xu is under no illusions about the risks, but this is his choice,” said Renee Chiang, a founder of New Century Press, the Hong Kong publisher that this month began shipping copies of “Negatives” to bookstores outside mainland China.Until now, Mr. Xu’s work has steered clear of content that could be construed as outwardly political. A prolific documentarian, he is best known for his moody black-and-white prints, taken in the late ’80s, that captured the beauty of Beijing’s ancient lanes before many were bulldozed in the city’s sprint to modernization. More recently, he earned plaudits for a series depicting a day in the life of a Beijing prostitute.He is also credited with helping pioneer the 798 Art Zone, a former military manufacturing complex that has been repurposed as a crowd-pleasing collection of art galleries and cafes.“Negatives” is not a conventional retrospective of the protests that spring. For one, there are no images of the bloody June 4 denouement that left hundreds, if not thousands, of unarmed civilians dead after Chinese troops blasted their way into the heart of the capital.But more intriguing is Mr. Xu’s decision to print only the raw, unadulterated 35-millimeter negatives he took with his clunky Konica that spring. There is something impenetrable about the images, with their muted colors and the ghostly, X-ray-like silhouettes of protesters.The negatives, it turns out, are just a visual feint. Armed with an iPhone or iPad — and after making a simple adjustment to the settings by choosing the “invert colors” option under the “accessibility” tab inside “general” — viewers can unlock the original color of Mr. Xu’s images by viewing them through their camera lens. As the faces of determined hunger strikers and frightened young soldiers come to life, it is as if the reader had stumbled upon a lost world.It is hard not to assume that by printing only negatives, Mr. Xu was trying to inoculate himself against potential retribution from the authorities. Sitting at a cafe in the north of the capital last week, he insisted otherwise, saying he was trying to educate millennials about the chemically-dependent world of photography that predates the digital age. “Unlike digital photographs, which can be manipulated, negatives never lie,” he said.In the spring of 1989, Mr. Xu had just quit his job at a state-owned advertising company, having been encouraged by the market-oriented policies of China’s paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping. When throngs of Chinese students took to the streets that April with their demands for less censorship, more freedom and an end to rampant official graft, Mr. Xu knew the nation was approaching a dangerous crossroads. “I sensed it was a critical moment and felt that every moment had to be documented,” he said.Over the next six weeks, he spent every day in and around Tiananmen Square, standing on the seat of his bicycle to get elevated views — and breaking two cameras when he tumbled to the ground.Mr. Xu would not say how many photographs he took, but the book features 64 images, a coy numeric allusion to the way many Chinese refer to the date of the crackdown — June 4 — to circumvent the country’s Internet censors. The final photo in the book, a blurry image of a tank, is the only nod to the brute force that brought the peaceful protests to an end.In the months that followed, party leaders declared the demonstrations a “counterrevolutionary riot” and sent many of the youthful organizers to jail.Perry Link, a China expert at the University of California, Riverside, who helped translate “The Tiananmen Papers,” a compilation of government documents about the events of June 4, said the party’s continuing effort to bury any discussion of the upheavals underscores its insecurities about its legitimacy. By showing jubilant and peaceful protests that brought millions to the streets — among them Communist Party stalwarts and army veterans — Mr. Xu’s images refute the official claims that the protests were a dangerous insurrection, Professor Link said.“It is a wonderful way of capturing that underside of insecurity that attends the Tiananmen issue and that, in a larger sense, haunts much of official China today,” he said. “The artist seems to be saying: ‘Here’s the reality that no one looks at squarely but that everyone knows is there.’ ”Bookstores in mainland China will not be stocking “Negatives” any time soon, and Mr. Xu has had trouble getting copies. Last week, a box of books sent to his home via FedEx was seized by customs and destroyed.Mr. Xu acknowledged the dangers of his latest project, but offered an equivocal shrug, saying the negatives were starting to yellow with age. “I am getting old,” he said with a faint smile. “If I don’t publish these now, then when?”