WASHINGTON —  On one of the roughest days in Mohamedou Ould Slahi’s 14 years of captivity at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, an American interrogator initially suggested that he pray out loud, then ridiculed him when he began reciting the Quran.Chained, barefoot and wearing only a thin uniform in an interrogation room chilled to 49 degrees, Mr. Slahi found himself on the receiving end of a barrage of questions. “Yes or no?” one interrogator shouted at him.“Neither,” Mr. Slahi answered. Incensed, his interrogator toppled Mr. Slahi’s chair, and he fell to the floor and onto his chains. “Oh, it hurt,” he later wrote.That scene and many more like it take place in “Guantánamo Diary,” the first and, so far, the only account of life at the American military prison written by someone still detained. On Tuesday, the family of Mr. Slahi, 44, used the publication of his book to start a campaign for his release.In painstaking, although heavily redacted, detail, Mr. Slahi recalls his arrest from his mother’s home in Mauritania in November 2001, his handover to the American authorities and his accounts of subsequent torture. In 2005, he wrote of his experiences. It would take his lawyers years of litigation and negotiation to get the military to declassify a redacted version.During those years — years in which he was never charged — a United States District Court judge ordered that Mr. Slahi be released because there was no evidence that he was involved in Qaeda terrorism plots. But the Obama administration appealed the decision, and the case was sent back to the courts.Mr. Slahi remains at Guantánamo and has still not been charged with a crime.His book, published in the United States by Little, Brown and Company, and in 16 other countries, has an accompanying website, www.guantanamodiary.com, that offers recorded readings of specific passages of the book by various celebrities.“So has the American democracy passed the test it was subjected to with the 2001 terrorist attack?” Colin Firth, the Academy Award-winning British actor, asks, reading words written by Mr. Slahi. “I leave this judgment to the reader.”Stephen Fry, the British actor and writer, read: “What a joke this government makes of its own people. What would the dead average American think if he or she could see what his or her government is doing to someone who has done no crimes against anybody.” The British actors Benedict Cumberbatch and Jude Law have also recorded passages from the book.At a news conference in London on Tuesday, Mr. Slahi’s family and supporters called for his release. “If you read the book you can see every line, every word, is written with the blood and tears,” said Yahdih Ould Slahi, Mr. Slahi’s younger brother.Larry Siems, the book editor, described Mr. Slahi as “one of the most abused prisoners in Guantánamo.”Mr. Slahi’s case is complex and problematic for the United States. His lawyers are sure to push to keep anything he may have said under duress from being used against him. In his book, Mr. Slahi said he finally told interrogators what he thought they wanted to hear in order to stop the torture.He was taken to Guantánamo Bay in 2002 after initial interrogations in Jordan and Afghanistan. He described being beaten during a three-hour boat trip in the Caribbean. He wrote that he was made to drink saltwater, deprived of sleep for 70 days and falsely told that his mother had been arrested and would be held in a locked cell unless he confessed.The American Civil Liberties Union has started an online petition calling for his release.Mr. Slahi was aware of his book’s release, said Hina Shamsi, director of the American Civil Liberties Union’s National Security Project. “He’s really happy it’s coming out,” she said. “He has always wanted to tell his story.”Closing the prison at Guantánamo remains a goal for President Obama, who has in recent months pressed to transfer detainees who have been cleared for release. In the last three months, Mr. Obama has moved closer to his target of reducing the number of prisoners to below 100, from 680 in 2003. Once the prison population is below 100, administration officials say the president will argue that it makes no economic sense to keep it open.But the quickened pace in transfers has angered several Republican lawmakers, including Senator John McCain of Arizona, who proposed legislation last week that would place a moratorium on the release of most prisoners held at Guantánamo Bay. The move was widely interpreted as an attempt to halt the recent surge in releases.