MEMPHIS —  As the Golden State Warriors gathered their belongings in the visitors’ locker room at FedEx Forum on Monday night, a staff member announced that the first bus to the airport would depart at 11:50 p.m. The Warriors had evened their Western Conference semifinal series with the Memphis Grizzlies at two games apiece, and they were headed home.But before Stephen Curry rediscovered his shooting touch and before the Warriors regained their rhythm on offense and before they reopened their lines of communication on defense, they had spent nearly two and a half hours in a conference room at their hotel here studying foreign material: everything they had been doing wrong.On Sunday, with about 36 hours to prepare for Game 4, the Warriors gathered at 11:30 a.m. for a film session, but it was no ordinary film session. The Warriors usually just watch a handful of clips from their previous game. But this time, Coach Steve Kerr surprised his players by telling them to get comfortable. They were going to watch their Game 3 loss in its entirety.“It felt like an eternity,” forward Harrison Barnes said. “It was not pretty. And it was a lot of stopping and starting and rewinding.”It took so long, in fact, that Kerr allowed for an intermission so the players could stretch their legs. Not once this season had the Warriors watched an entire game film together. Perhaps they had never felt the need to do so, which would at least be understandable. As they ran their record to 67-15 during the regular season, adversity was in short supply.So for many of the players, it was uncharted territory: They desperately needed to win in a hostile environment to avoid a three-games-to-one deficit against an experienced opponent. But on the eve of his team’s most important game of the season, Kerr had no qualms about doing something completely different.Rather than run from their problems or simply sugarcoat them, Kerr decided that the best course of action was to present, in unfiltered fashion, the many reasons the Warriors were in this huge mess. So he went possession by possession through their 99-89 loss in Game 3. If Kerr lectured at times, he also encouraged dialogue.“It’s one thing to watch isolated clips, but when you see the flow of the game, you’re just like, we were taking some bad shots,” Barnes said. “Everyone’s kind of acknowledging that: What do you guys see here? How should we do this? How should we do that?”It was Kerr’s version of democracy in action, and if there was a point of emphasis during the Warriors’ protracted film session, it was their lack of ball movement in Game 3. The Warriors made it far too easy for defenders to key on Curry and Klay Thompson along the perimeter. Move the ball, Kerr kept telling them. Trust the offense.“When you have everyone pitching in, you can say, ‘Hey, Steph, go get a basket,’ and that lane is so much more open for him to go in there and finish,” Barnes said.In Game 3, the Warriors shot 43.2 percent from the field and 23.1 percent from 3-point range. Curry, in particular, labored to find space for open shots, going 2 of 10 from 3-point range. It was an atypical effort from him, but he anticipated that his mistakes were correctable. He knew he needed to exercise more patience.“We missed some open shots those last two games, but the majority of them were contested and rushed,” Curry said.On Monday, Kerr could sense that Curry approached the game with a different mind-set — as a more willing passer, as someone determined to get his teammates involved. The Warriors took 13 shots before Curry attempted his first of the game, a pull-up from 16 feet that he buried.“I think we started out the first quarter looking for the best shot on every possession,” Curry said.With Curry deferring to teammates early on, fully aware that it would make his life easier in the long run, Draymond Green asserted himself and scored 11 of his 16 points in the first quarter. Cast by Memphis fans as the series villain after making contact with the surgically repaired face of the Grizzlies’ Mike Conley in Game 2, Green was booed every time he touched the ball, which only seemed to make him want the ball more.“It’s actually funny to me,” Green said. “I never saw myself being that guy in the N.B.A., getting booed in N.B.A. arenas. It’s like, Oh, I arrived now.”It was, above all, a consistent effort from the Warriors, who led by 7 points after the first quarter and by 17 at halftime. Curry finished with 33 points in their 101-84 win.“I thought the whole team was just more alert,” Kerr said. “What we talked about the last couple of days was that it’s the playoffs and you better compete every possession. You’re playing a great team. They’ve been at this for years, and they know what this is all about.”Kerr was quick to point out that the Warriors committed 21 turnovers and had ample room for improvement before Game 5 on Wednesday night at Oracle Arena.“We’re still not there,” Kerr said.But getting closer, having passed an important test after studying hard in Memphis.